--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number14697 of 2015 state of gujarat ors.
.appellants versus utility users welfare association ors.
.respondents with c.a.
number13451/2015 t.c.
c number139/2015 t.c.
c number138/2015 t.c.
c number137/2015 t.c.
c number140/2015 c.a.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

number3759-3760/2016 t.p. c number974/2016 judgment sanjay kishan kaul, j. signature not verified digitally signed by 1.
the electricity act, 2003 hereinafter referred to as the said deepak mansukhani date 2018.04.13 105148 ist reason act provides for central and state regulatory commissions.
insofar as the appointment of the chairperson of these commissions is concerned, the relevant provisions stipulate that the chairperson may be a judge of a high court for the state commission, a judge of the supreme court or the chief justice of a high court for the central commission.
the common question, which arises for consideration in these appeals is whether the expression may should be read as shall, i.e., whether it is mandatory to have a judicial mind presiding over these commissions in the form of a judge.
2. the division bench of the madras high court vide judgment dated 7.2.2014 took the view in respect of the challenge laid to the selection process of the chairman of the tamil nadu state electricity commission that there was no such mandatory requirement though there was an option to appoint a judge.
3. the division bench of the gujarat high court in a similar case in respect of the appointment of a chairperson of the gujarat state regulatory commission vide impugned order dated 8.10.2015 opined that it was so mandatory.
4. the aforesaid judicial conflict being before this court, the challenges laid in different states were transferred to this court through transfer petitions vide order dated 3.11.2015.
5. the union of india, as also some of the state commissions are arrayed on the one side to canvas for an interpretation of the provision as it reads, while on the other side, are consumers, activists and some affected parties, who canvassed the importance of the state regulatory commissions and the nature of functions it performs, to establish that a judge alone should preside over these commissions.
6. we do not see the necessity of going into individual facts nor were the pleas advanced on that basis before us.
the submissions have been based on the provisions of the said act and the legal pronouncements dealing with the issue of the mandatory requirement of certain commissions to be headed by a judicial mind.
the act 7. the said act came into force on 10.6.2003 on publication in the gazette.
the act seeks to consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity.
the preamble to the said act states as under an act to consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive to development of electricity industry, promoting competition therein, protecting interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas, rationalisation of electricity tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of efficient and environmentally benign policies, constitution of central electricity authority, regulatory commissions and establishment of appellate tribunal and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
8.
the detailed statement of objects reasons mentions that the electricity supply industry in india was governed by the indian electricity act, 1910, the electricity supply act, 1948 and the electricity regulatory commission act, 1998.
the state electricity boards constituted under the electricity supply act, 1948 failed to perform on account of various factors inter alia fixation of appropriate tariff and the cross-subsidies reached unsustainable levels.
the electricity regulatory commission act of 1998 was an endeavour to distance the government from determination of tariffs by having independent regulatory commissions.
9. part x of the said act deals with matters relating to regulatory commissions their constitution, powers and functions, etc. sections 76 77 of the said act are concerned with the constitution of the central commission and the qualifications for appointment of members of the central commission.
the provisions are similar to the appointment of the members and chairperson of the state commissions except to the extent that while the relevant sub-section provides that the central government may appoint the chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been a judge of the supreme court or the chief justice of a high court in the case of the central commission, in the case of state commissions, the provision states that the state government may appoint any person as the chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a judge of a high court.
section 78 of the said act deals with the constitution of the selection committee to recommend members, while the functions of the central commission are specified in section 79 of the said act.
section 80 of the said act provides for establishment of a central advisory committee with the chairperson of the central commission being the ex officio chairperson of the central advisory committee.
this committee is to advise the central commission on major questions of policy quality, continuity and extent of service provided by the licensees compliance by the licensees with the conditions and requirements of their licence protection of consumer interest electricity supply and overall standards of performance by utilities section 81 of the said act .
10. section 82 of the said act is in respect of constitution of state commission while section 84 prescribes the qualifications for appointment of chairperson and members of state commissions.
section 85 of the said act provides for constitution of selection committee to select members of state commission and section 86 prescribes the functions of state commission.
similar to the central advisory committee, the state advisory committee can be constituted under section 87 of the said act with similarity of functions under section 88 of the said act.
the relevant provisions, which will have to be referred to are being reproduced hereunder section 84.
qualifications for appointment of chairperson and members of state commission. 1 the chairperson and the members of the state commission shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing who have adequate knowledge of, and have shown capacity in, dealing with problems relating to engineering, finance, commerce, economics, law or management. 2 notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 1 , the state government may appoint any person as the chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a judge of a high court provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made except after consultation with the chief justice of that high court. 3 the chairperson or any other member of the state commission shall not hold any other office. 4 the chairperson shall be the chief executive of the state commission.
section 85. constitution of selection committee to select members of state commission. 1 the state government shall, for the purposes of selecting the members of the state commission, constitute a selection committee consisting of a a person who has been a judge of the high court.
chairperson b the chief secretary of the concerned state .member c the chairperson of the authority or the chairperson of the central commission .
member provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the appointment of a person as the chairperson who is or has been a judge of the high court. 2 the state government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of the chairperson or a member and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure of the chairperson or member, make a reference to the selection committee for filling up of the vacancy. 3 the selection committee shall finalise the selection of the chairperson and members within three months from the date on which the reference is made to it. 4 the selection committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy referred to it. 5 before recommending any person for appointment as the chairperson or other member of the state commission, the selection committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such chairperson or member, as the case may be. 6 no appointment of chairperson or other member shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the selection committee 86.
functions of state commission.- 1 the state commission shall discharge the following functions, namely-- a determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the state provided that where open access has been permitted to a category of consumers under section 42, the state commission shall determine only the wheeling charges and surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of consumers b regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating companies or licensees or from other sources through agreements for purchase of power for distribution and supply within the state c facilitate intra-state transmission and wheeling of electricity d issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission licensees, distribution licensees and electricity traders with respect to their operations within the state e promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of electricity from such sources, a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee f adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees and generating companies and to refer any dispute for arbitration g levy fee for the purposes of this act h specify state grid code consistent with the grid code specified under clause h of sub-section 1 of section 79 i specify or enforce standards with respect to quality, continuity and reliability of service by licensees j fix the trading margin in the intra-state trading of electricity, if considered, necessary k discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it under this act. 2 the state commission shall advise the state government on all or any of the following matters, namely-- i promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in activities of the electricity industry ii promotion of investment in electricity industry iii reorganisation and restructuring of electricity industry in the state iv matters concerning generation, transmission, distribution and trading of electricity or any other matter referred to the state commission by that government 3 the state commission shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and discharging its functions. 4 in discharge of its functions, the state commission shall be guided by the national electricity policy, national electricity plan and tariff policy published under section 3. 11.
we may note a distinction between the members of the central commission and the state commissions inasmuch as section 77 dealing with the appointment of members of central commission provides as under 77.
qualifications for appointment of members of central commission.- 1 the chairperson and the members of the central commission shall be persons having adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or shown capacity in, dealing with, problems relating to engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance or management and shall be appointed in the following manner, namely-- a one person having qualifications and experience in the field of engineering with specialisation in generation, transmission or distribution of electricity b one person having qualifications and experience in the field of finance c two persons having qualifications and experience in the field of economics, commerce, law or management provided that not more than one member shall be appointed under the same category under clause c .
12.
however, for appointment of a member for state commission, there is no such limitation on the number of members from a particular field though it does state that such members should have adequate knowledge and shown capacity in, dealing with problems relating to engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance or management.
sub- section 2 of both sections 77 and section 84 are similar except for the person to be appointed.
thus, irrespective of the provisions in sub- section 1 of section 84 stipulating the fields from which the members will have to be appointed, sub-section 2 begins with a notwithstanding clause stating that the state government may appoint any person as the chairperson from amongst those, who have been, or is a judge of the high court.
the proviso to sub-section 2 stipulates that no appointment under sub-section 2 shall be made except after consultation with the chief justice of that high court.
this, in fact, recognizes the pre-eminence and requirement of consultation with the chief justice of the high court in case of appointment of a judge as the chairperson of a state commission.
for the central commission, the consultation is with the chief justice of india, because the appointment envisaged is of a judge of the supreme court or the chief justice of a high court.
13.
the selection committee under section 85 of the said act for selecting members of the state commission is to be headed by a judge of the high court but once again the proviso states that this would not be applicable to the appointment of a person as the chairperson who is or has been a judge of the high court.
the effect of this is that, in case the person to be appointed as chairperson to the state commission is a judge, necessary consultation will have to be with the chief justice of the high court as per the proviso to section 84 2 .
14.
it may be noticed that under section 78 of the said act, insofar as the selection committee to recommend members of the central commission is concerned, the chairperson of the selection committee has to be a member of the planning commission in-charge of the energy sector.
once again, the proviso to section 78 makes an exception to the appointment of a person as a chairperson of the central commission, who is, or has been a judge of the supreme court or the chief justice of the high court, as in that eventuality, the chief justice of india has to be consulted.
15.
the appellate tribunal for electricity is provided in part xi of the said act.
section 111 of the said act deals with the appeal to appellate tribunal from orders made by an adjudicating officer under the said act, or the appropriate commission under the said act.
section 112 of the said act deals with the composition of the appellate tribunal.
the tribunal sits in benches with at least one judicial member and one technical member.
section 113 of the said act provides for qualifications for appointment of chairperson and member of the appellate tribunal.
the chairperson of the appellate tribunal has to be someone, who is, or has been a judge of the supreme court or the chief justice of a high court.
thus, there is no quibble over the proposition that there is a senior judicial mind heading the appellate tribunal and that every bench of the appellate tribunal mandatorily has to have at least one judicial member and one technical member.
the attorney generals argument 16.
the learned attorney general, appearing on behalf of the union of india and the state of gujarat, took us through the provisions and the scheme of the said act and referred to the judicial pronouncements.
he canvassed for the reading of the statute as it stands and, thus, pleaded that where the legislature in its wisdom had used the word may consciously, there was no need to read it as shall.
learned attorney general sought to emphasise that the functions of both the commissions are more technical in nature and really do not have much of an adjudicatory element requiring a legal mind.
this is apart from the fact that it is not as if a non-lawyer or non-judge is incapable of appreciating a legal point, as even arbitrators are appointed from these fields when the dispute is more technical in character.
the primary function is determination of tariff, regulating electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees, facilitating intra-state transmission, issuance of license, promotion of cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy, levying fee, etc. out of the 11 functions enlisted of a state commission under section 86 of the said act and for the central commission under section 79 of the said act, adjudication of disputes between licensees and generating companies and to refer any dispute for arbitration is the only one, which can be said to have any adjudicatory flavor.
in fact, the argument advanced was that the nature of work would not be something which the judges would be comfortable with, being highly technical in nature, nor are judges trained for such technical matters.
in the context of the functions and duties of the authority, relevant provisions under the said act were referred to.
section 16 requires an appropriate commission to specify conditions of license.
section 45 of the said act makes provision for power to recover charges, section 46 of the said act makes provision for power to recover expenditure.
section 50 provides for the state commission to specify an electricity supply code for recovery, billing, etc., while section 57 empowers the appropriate commission to specify standards of performance of a licensee.
section 61 deals with tariff regulations and section 66 deals with the development of a market in power, guided by the national electricity policy.
looking to all these functions, it was canvassed that a purposive interpretation should be given to the expression used, for interpreting the provisions of appointment of the chairperson.
mindful of the technical nature of functions as they are, it was argued that a judge was not required and that this was apparent from the fact that even at present, all state commissions are headed by non-judges, except one.
the provision was stated to be only felicitous in character, as it gives an option to appoint a judge.
it was argued that there could be a possibility of a judge, rarely, as it may be, being an expert in this field who could be so appointed.
however, if a judge is to be appointed, the process of appointment is different by reason of his her having held a constitutional post and thus, the selection committee constituted would not be recommending the appointment, but the consultation would have to be with the chief justice concerned.
17. learned attorney general then proceeded to refer to the judgment of this court in tamil nadu generation and distribution corporation limited v. ppn power generating company private limited1 wherein this very act was under consideration.
the matter related to inter alia the jurisdiction of the state commission in tamil nadu to either adjudicate a dispute or refer it to arbitration under section 86 1 f of the said act, which was held to be required to be exercised reasonably and not arbitrarily.
in para 55, the court gave its imprimatur to the submission advanced on behalf of the appellant that adjudicatory functions generally ought not to be conducted by the state 1 2014 11 scc 53 commission in the absence of a judicial member, especially in relation to disputes which are not fairly relative to tariff fixation or the advisory and recommendatory functions of the state commission.
in the said context, a reference was also made to the constitution bench judgment of this court in kihoto hollohan v. zachillhu2 which examined the nature of the power of the speaker or the chairman under para 6 1 of the tenth schedule of the constitution of india.
the finding recorded is that the state commission in deciding a lis relating to the generating company was discharging judicial functions and exercising the judicial powers of a far reaching effect and must therefore have the essential trappings of the court for which it was said .this can only be achieved by the presence of one or more judicial members in the state commission which is called upon to decide complicated contractual or civil issues which would normally have been decided by a civil court it was also observed that the decisions of the state commission had far reaching consequences and were final and binding between the parties subject, of course, to judicial review.
18.
the bench thereafter proceeds to examine section 84 2 of the 2 1992 supp 2 scc 651 said act.
it was observed that section 84 2 enables the state government to appoint any person as the chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a judge of a high court, and that such appointment shall be made after consultation with the chief justice of the high court.
thus, where complicated legal issues have been raised, it was observed, the presence of one or more judicial members in the state commission would become necessary.
no judicial member had been appointed in the tamil nadu state commission and, thus, the authorities concerned were required to look into the desirability and feasibility for making appointments, of any person, as the chairperson from amongst persons, who is or has been a judge of a high court.
19.
the provisions of section 113 of the said act were referred to, to conclude that the legislature was aware that the functions performed by the state commission as well as the appellate tribunal are judicial in nature and, thus, the appellate authority has the trappings of the court.
this essential feature had not been made mandatory under section 84 of the said act.
in the opinion of the bench, it would be advisable for the state government to exercise the enabling power under section 84 2 of the said act to appoint a person, who is, or has been a judge of a high court as chairperson of the state commission.
the aforesaid discussions were referred to by the learned attorney general to canvas that the question involved in the case really did not pertain to section 84 2 of the said act but certain observations had been made, nonetheless.
the tribunals envisaged under part xiv a of the constitution would stand on a different footing and therefore cannot be compared with the commission in question.
in any case, the observations itself show that the bench was conscious of the limitations of the said act and, thus, only rendered an advise to the state government, rather than issue a direction.
in the alternative, at best, the discussion was with reference to the desirability and feasibility of at least one member having legal knowledge rather than a mandatory requirement of a chairman being a judge.
20.
next, referring to the judgment in pareena swarup v. union of india3, it was emphasized that the nature of functions of a commission under the said act cannot be equated to the functions being performed by a tribunal under the prevention of money laundering act, 2002, an 3 2008 14 scc 107 adjudicatory function.
the observations were made in the context of tribunals being created, which were seeking to exercise functions earlier performed by regular judicial forums.
the functions, now vested with the appropriate commission under the said act, were really being performed under the electricity regulatory commission act.
21.
the aforesaid judicial pronouncements, it was, thus, canvassed, could not have been utilized by the gujarat high court to come to a conclusion that the post of the chairperson of the state commission mandatorily has to be occupied by a judge, though it could be occupied by a judge.
22.
we may, however, note that the view adopted by the gujarat high court is also based on the nature of powers vested with the appropriate commission under sections 94, 95 96 of the said act, which are as under 94.
powers of appropriate commission.- 1 the appropriate commission shall, for the purposes of any inquiry or proceedings under this act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the code of civil procedure, 1908 5 of 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely-- a summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath b discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as evidence c receiving evidence on affidavits d requisitioning of any public record e issuing commission for the examination of witnesses f reviewing its decisions, directions and orders g any other matter which may be prescribed. 2 the appropriate commission shall have the powers to pass such interim order in any proceeding, hearing or matter before the appropriate commission, as that commission may consider appropriate. 3 the appropriate commission may authorise any person, as it deems fit, to represent the interest of the consumers in the proceedings before it.
95.
proceedings before commission.- all proceedings before the appropriate commission shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the indian penal code and the appropriate commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 2 of 1974 .
96.
powers of entry and seizure.- the appropriate commission or any officer, not below the rank of a gazetted officer specially authorised in this behalf by the commission, may enter any building or place where the commission has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or copies there from subject to the provisions of section 100 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973, insofar as it may be applicable.
23.
the conclusion in favour of an appropriate commission being headed by a judge in the context of the commission having the trappings of a court is drawn on the basis of the aforesaid provisions, apart from the provisions relating to the appointment of members and the chairperson.
c.a. number13451/2015 stand of the state of tamil nadu 24.
the state government, having succeeded before the madras high court as per the impugned judgment dated 7.2.2014, supported the view taken by the madras bench and adopted the arguments of the learned attorney general.
mr. shekhar naphade, learned senior advocate appearing for the state of tamil nadu pleaded that the whole scheme of the said act ought to be taken into consideration and that disproportionate importance was being given to sub-section 2 of section 84 for appointment of a judge as a chairperson, not realizing the variety of functions performed by the commission, of which the adjudicatory functions were only a small percentage.
c.a. number14697/2015 plea of the gujarat state regulatory commission 25.
mr. jayant bhushan, learned senior advocate appearing for the gujarat state electricity regulatory commission, sought to pose a question, i.e., where does the judgment in tamil nadu generation and distribution corporation limited4 make it mandatory for a judge to be the chairperson?
the very wordings were said to be recommendatory in character, which had already been read out by the learned attorney general.
in the alternative, it was pleaded that the observations made were really obiter dicta, as the issue of appointment of the chairperson of the state commission was not the lis before the court in that matter.
26.
he then posed a question when the act and the judgment does not make the appointment of a judge as the chairperson mandatory, then is there any other material, which can be said to make the appointment of the chairperson as a judge mandatory?
in this behalf he submitted that the opposite side could only fall back on madras bar association v. union of india anr.
5 mj-ii .
the said judgment dealt with the creation of the national tax tribunal under the national tax tribunal act, 2005.
the constitution of the tribunal was held to 4 supra 5 2014 10 scc 1 be one for transfer of the appellate jurisdiction under tax laws vested in the high courts.
the majority held that the act could not pass the test of constitutionality, on account of inter alia, the provisions relating to the appointment of the chairpersons and members of the tribunals.
in the said case, reference was made to the earlier constitution bench judgment in the union of india v. madras bar association 6 mj-i , crystallizing the legal position while transferring adjudicatory functions from courts to tribunals.
it was observed that such tribunals should possess the same independence, security and capacity as the courts which the tribunals are mandated to substitute and thus, members of the tribunals discharging judicial functions could only be drawn from sources possessed of expertise in law and competent to discharge judicial functions.
technical members could also be appointed where such technical expertise is essential.
but where the adjudicatory process transferred to the tribunal did not require any specialized skills, knowledge or expertise, the provision for appointment of technical member would constitute a clear case of delusion and encroachment upon the independence of the judiciary, and the rule of law.
on the stature of members, it was observed that 6 2010 11 scc 1 the same would depend on the jurisdiction transferred, i.e., if the jurisdiction of the high court was transferred to the tribunals, the stature of the members of the newly constituted tribunal, should be possessed of qualifications akin to the judges of the high court.
the same would be the position qua district judges appointment.
such a process of judicial review, in madras bar association v. union of india7 mj-ii , was held to be a part of the basic structure of the constitution.
27.
in the context of the functions to be carried out under the said act, it was observed that the present case was not one where the powers of judicial review which were vested in a judicial forum was sought to be transferred.
the importance of judicial review and its sanctity was maintained by the composition of the appellate tribunal, which would hear appeals from the orders of the commission.
the functions of the commission were canvassed to be one of technical nature largely, and thus, would not require a judge to head the commission.
in the alternative, it was stated that, at best, the requirement of a mandatory legal member may be read into the 7 supra provisions, though the explicit terms of the statute do not say so.
28. learned counsel took us through the provisions of section 85 of the said act to contend that the reference to the chairperson under sub- sections 2 , 3 , 5 6 of section 85 would be made otiose, as in that eventuality, the selection committee would never be called upon to appoint a chairperson.
a judge could be appointed as the chairperson only through the alternative route of section 84 2 read with the proviso thereto.
29. learned counsel also referred to tamil nadu generation and distribution corporation limited8, more specifically to para 25, which recorded the submission of the counsel for the appellant therein to the effect that the state commission cannot be an adjudicatory body as it does not have the trappings of the court, which would normally be manned exclusively by the judges.
the plea was that under section 84 of the said act, there is no requirement for the chairperson or the member of a state commission to be a judge of a high court.
no such appointment had actually been made in that case nor did the commission have a judicial member and, thus, the same was contrary to the constitution bench judgment of this court in madras bar 8 supra association9 mj-i .
he, thus, submitted that it is in the context of this argument that what was observed by the bench in that judgment would have to be construed and nothing more than that.
it is this argument, which has been dealt with when the observations relied upon in the impugned order were referred to.
this is stated to be quite apparent even from para 55, which records the submissions of the then counsel for the appellant in tamil nadu generation and distribution corporation limited10 and what was accepted by the court in para 59 of the judgment, i.e., adjudicatory functions generally ought not to be conducted by the state commis