--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc.
vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. 1 reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number2573 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number18525 of 2009 vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia appellant versus state of gujarat and ors.
respondents with civil appeal number2574 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number22867 of 2009 arjunbhai sumanlal bhavsar vs. state of gujarat and ors.
with civil appeal number2575 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number33708 of 2009 rajenbhai baldevbhai shah vs. baljiben kabhaibhai patanwadia and ors.
with civil appeal number2576 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number22460 of 2009 rajenbhai baldevbhai shah vs. laxmanbhai fakirbhai and ors.
with civil appeal number2577 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number24357 of 2009 gopiraj dhanraj bagmar and anr.
vs. state of gujarat and ors.
signature not verified with digitally signed by mukesh kumar date 2020.06.16 140627 ist civil appeal number2578 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number24360 of 2009 reason rameshbhai bankabhai vs. state of gujarat and ors.
civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc.
vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. 2 with civil appeal number2579-2580 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number2080 of 2011 babubhai manchhabhai bharvad vs. state of gujarat and ors.
with civil appeal number2581-2582 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number21688 of 2012 shailadevi pooranraj and ors.
vs. state of gujarat with civil appeal number2583 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number32288 of 2013 shri kishan chand bela ram advani vs. state of gujarat and ors.
with civil appeal number2584-2585 of 2020 arising out of special leave petition civil number16669 of 2015 ghanshyambhai narbheram vs. state of gujarat and ors. judgment uday umesh lalit, j. 1. leave granted.
2. these appeals arise out of the common judgment and order dated 17.03.2009 passed by the division bench of the high court of gujarat at ahmedabad in special civil application number25058 of 2006 and all other civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc.
vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. connected matters while answering the questions referred to it by a single judge of the high court.
the questions that arose for consideration and the circumstances in which the matters were referred to it were set out by the division bench as under-.
we are called upon to decide as to whether section 63 of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands, act, 1948 for short the bombay tenancy act debars an agriculturist from parting with his agricultural land to a non-agriculturist through a will so also, whether section 43 1 of the tenancy act restricts transfer of any land or interest purchased by the tenant under sections 17b, 32, 32f.
321. 320, 32u, 33 1 or 88e or sold to any person under section 32p or 64 of the tenancy act through the execution of a will by way of testamentary disposition. learned single judges of this court have taken a consistent view that such transfer of property through testamentary disposition would not violate section 43 or 63 of the tenancy act, justice j.b. mehta in the case of manharlal ratanlal radmansinh chausinh v. taiyabali jaji mohamed others 1967-68 vol.5 glt 199 while interpreting section 43 1 of the tenancy act took the view that the expression transfer which is used in section 43 1 of the tenancy act must be interpreted in light of the transfer of property act viz.
the transfer by way of act of parties.
learned judge took the view that, if the legislature wanted to include a transfer by operation of law as to include succession, insolvency, inheritance, etc. or sales by public auction, specific provision would have been made to that effect.
learned judge held all the specific categories which are mentioned are all of transfers by act of parties, bequest by will cannot be included in the scope of the term gift or assignment.
justice rajesh balia in ghanshyambhai nabheram v. state of gujarat and others 1999 2 glr 1061 while interpreting section 63 of the tenancy act took a view that just like, a non-agriculturist be not deprived of his inheritance, a legatee under a will, can also be a non-agriculturist, hence, there is no bar in succeeding the property through testamentary disposition.
learned judge held that revenue laws dealing with agricultural lands have not made the land uninheritable and they also do not disqualify a non-agriculturist from inheritance nor a civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. number of persons are disentitled from succeeding to estate of an agriculturist as body of successors, which may result in well defined share of the estate of deceased vesting in them individually.
justice rajesh balia again in pravinbhai bhailalbhai gor v. rajkumar gupta, collector, vadodara 1999 1 glr 440 while interpreting section 43 and 63 of the tenancy act took the view that both provisions clearly go to show that they refer only to transaction or transfer or agreement to transfer of land or any interest therein which are inter vivos and not to vesting of such rights in anyone as a result of transmission or as a result of succession on death of holder and the provisions do not affect the operation of law of inheritance.
appeal filed against the above judgment was, however, dismissed in state of gujarat v. p.b. gor 2000 3 glr 2168 .
justice k.a. puj also took identical view in gasfulbhai mohmadbhai bilakhia v. state of gujarat 2005 1 glr 575 and gopiraj dedraj agrawal gopiram tudraj agrawal v. state of gujarat 2004 1 glr 237 .
learned judge also made reference to the circular dated 13.02.1989 issued by the state government and took a view that that section 43 as well as section 63 of the tenancy act would not debar transfer of property by testamentary disposition.
justice r.k. abichandani also took the same view in babubhai mervanbhai patel v. state of gujarat 2005 1 glh uj 3. learned single judge justice jayant patel expressed some doubts about the views expressed in the above-referred judgments and felt that the matter requires re-consideration in light of the decisions rendered by the apex court in sangappa kalyanappa bangi dead through lr air 1998 sc 3229 1998 7 scc 294 rajendra babu j. and jayamma v. maria bai and another 2004 7 scc 459 sinha, j. and hence these matters have been placed before us.
3. sections 43 and section 63 of the act 1 are quoted here for ready reference- 43. restriction on transfers of land purchased or sold under this act 1the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands act, 1948 as applicable to state of gujarat.
civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. 1 no land or any interest therein purchased by a tenant under section 17b, 32, 32f, 32i, 32o2, 32u, 43-1d or 88e or sold to any person under section 32p or 64 shall be transferred or shall be agreed by an instrument in writing to be transferred, by sale, gift, exchange, mortgage, lease or assignment, without the previous sanction of the collector and except in consideration of payment of such amount as the state government may by general or special order determine and no such land or any interest, therein shall be partitioned without the previous sanction of the collector.
provided that no previous sanction of the collector shall be required, if the partition of the land is among the members of the family who have direct blood relation or among the legal heirs of the tenant provided further that the partition of the land as aforesaid shall not be valid if it is made in contravention of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force provided also that such members of the family or the legal heirs shall hold the land, after the partition, on the same terms, conditions and restrictions as were applicable to such land or interest therein purchased by the tenant or the person. 1a the sanction under sub-section 1 shall be given by the collector in such circumstances and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the state government. 1aa notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 1 , it shall be lawful for such tenant or a person to mortgage or create a charge on his interests in the land in favour of the state government in consideration of a loan advanced to him by the state government under the land improvement loans act, 1983, the agriculturists loans act, 1984, or the bombay non-agriculturists loans act, 1928, as in force in the state of gujarat, or in favour of a bank or co-operative society, and without prejudice to any other remedy open to the state government, bank or co- operative society, as the case may be, in the event of his making default in payment of such loan in accordance 2 the words 32o were deleted by guj.
act number10 of 2009 civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. with the terms on which such loan was granted, it shall be lawful for the state government, bank or co-operative society, as the case may be, to cause his interest in the land to be attached and sold and the proceeds to be applied in payment of such loan.
explanation.
for the purposes of this sub-section, bank means a the state bank of india constituted under the state bank of india act,1955 b any subsidiary bank as defined in clause k of section 2 of the state bank of india subsidiary banks act, 1959 c any correspondent new bank as defined in clause d of section 2 of the banking companies acquisition and transfer of undertakings act, 1970 d the agricultural refinance and development corporation, established under the agricultural refinance and development corporation act, 1963. 1b nothing in sub-section 1 or 1aa shall apply to land purchased under section 32, 32f, or 64 by a permanent tenant thereof, if prior to the purchase, the permanent tenant, by usage, custom, agreement or decree or order of a court, held a transferable right in the tenancy of the land. 1c the land to which sub-section 1 applies and for which no permission is required under sub-section 1 of section 65b of the bombay land revenue code, 1879 for use of such land for a bonafide industrial purpose may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 1 of this section, be sold without the previous sanction of the collector under sub-section 1 but subject to payment of such amount as may be determined by the state government under sub-section 1 . 2 any transfer or partition, or any agreement of transfer, or any land or any interest therein in contravention of sub-section 1 shall be invalid.
civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. 63.
transfers to non-agriculturists barred. 1 save as provided in this act- a no sale including sales in execution of a decree of a civil court or for recovery of arrears of land revenue or for sums recoverable as arrears of land revenue , gift, exchange or lease of any land or interest therein, or b no mortgage of any land or interest therein, in which the possession of the mortgaged property is delivered to the mortgage, or c no agreement made by an instrument in writing for the sale, gift, exchange, lese or mortgage of any land or interest therein, shall be valid in favour of a person who is not an agriculturist or who being an agriculturist cultivates personally land not less than the ceiling area whether as an owner or tenant or partly as owner and partly as tenant or who is not an agricultural labourer provided that the collector or an officer authorised by the state government in this behalf may grant permission for such sale, gift, exchange, lease or mortgage, or for such agreement on such conditions as may be prescribed.
provided further that no such permission shall be granted, where land is being sold to a person who is not an agriculturist for agricultural purpose, if the annual income of such person from other sources exceeds five thousand rupees. 1a the state government may, by notification in the official gazette, exempt from the provisions of sub- section 1 , for the transfer of any agricultural land to any public trust established for the charitable purpose and which is non-profitable in nature, for the use of such land in the field of health and education, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein. 2 nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the sale, gift, exchange or lease, or the agreement for the sale, gift, exchange or lease, of a dwelling house or the site thereof or any land appurtenant to it in favour of an civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. agricultural labourer or an artisan or a person carrying on any allied pursuit. 3 nothing in this section shall apply or be deemed to have applied to a mortgage of any land or interest therein effected in favour of a co-operative society as security for the loan advanced by such society or any transfer declared to be a mortgage by a court under section 24 of the bombay agricultural debtors relief act, 1947. 4 nothing in section 63a shall apply to any sale made under sub-section 1 .
4. the sections of the act which are referred to in said section 43 and in the light of which the reference was answered by the division bench as well as some other sections having bearing on the matters in issue, are extracted hereunder 17. tenant to be given first option of purchasing site on which he has built dwelling house.- 1 if a landlord to whom the site referred to in section 16 belongs, intends to sell such site, the tenant at the expense of whom or whose predecessor-in-title, a dwelling house is built thereon shall be given in the manner provided in sub- section 2 of the first option of purchasing the site at a value determined by the tribunal. 2 the landlord intending to sell such site shall give notice in writing to the tenant requiring him to state within three months from the date of service of such notice whether he is willing to purchase the site. 3 if within the period of three months so specified the tenant intimates in writing to the landlord that he is willing to purchase the site, the landlord shall make an application to the tribunal for the determination of the value of the site.
on receipt of such application the tribunal after giving notice to the tenant and after holding an inquiry shall determine the value of the site which shall not exceed 20 times the annual rent thereof.
the tribunal may, by an order in writing require the tenant to deposit civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc.
the amount of value of such site within one year from the date of such order.
on the deposit of such amount the site shall be deemed to have been transferred to the tenant and the amount deposited shall be paid to the landlord.
the tribunal shall on payment of the prescribed fees grant a certificate in the prescribed form to such tenant specifying therein the site so transferred and the name of such tenant. 4 if the tenant fails to intimate his willingness to purchase the site within the time specified in sub-section 2 or fails to deposit the amount of the value within the time specified in sub-section 3 the tenant shall be deemed to have relinquished his right of first option to purchase the site and the landlord shall then be entitled to evict the tenant either on payment of such compensation for the value of the structure of such dwelling house as may be determined by the tribunal or allow the tenant at his option to remove the materials of the structure. 5 any sale of a site held in contravention of this section shall be null and void.
17b.
tenant to be deemed to have purchased sites referred to in section 16 from specified date. 1 on and with effect from such date as the state government may, by notification in the official gazette, specify, every tenant referred to in section 16 shall be deemed to have purchased from his landlord the site on which the dwelling house occupied by such tenant, was built, and the land immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for enjoyment of the dwelling house free from all encumbrances at the price to the fixed by the tribunal, being a price not exceeding twenty times the annual rent for the site. 2 deleted by guj.
act number5 of 1973 3 as soon as may be thereafter, the tribunal shall publish or cause to be published a notice in such village within its jurisdiction in which all such sites are situate and shall, as far as practicable, issue notice to each such landlord and tenant and to any other person interested in such site to appear before it on the date specified in the notice.
the notice published in a village shall be affixed in the chavdi or at such public place as the tribunal may direct.
civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. 4 the tribunal shall, after giving an opportunity to such landlord, tenant and other person interested to be heard and after holding an inquiry determine the price of the site. 5 on the determination of the price of the site under sub- section 4 , the tenant shall deposit the amount of such price with tribunal- a either in lump sum within one year from such date, or b in such instalments not exceeding three with simple interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, and at such intervals during the period not exceeding three years and on or before such dates.
as may be fixed by the tribunal and the tribunal shall direct that the amount deposited in lump sum or the amount of the instalments deposited at each interval shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of section 32q so far as they are applicable. 6 on the deposit the amount of the price in lump sum or of the last instalment of such price, the tribunal shall, on payment of a prescribed fee, grant a certificate in the prescribed form to the tenant declaring him to be the purchaser to the site.
such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the sale. 7 if the tenant fails to pay any instalment on or before the date fixed by the tribunal under sub-section 5 , the amount of such instalment and the interest thereon shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 8 if after holding an inquiry under sub-section 4 , the tribunal is satisfied that the tenant is not willing to purchase the site, the tribunal shall issue a certificate to the landlord to that effect.
on the issue of such certificate the landlord shall be entitled to evict the tenant and dispose of the site in such manner as he may think fit either on payment of such compensation for the value of the structure of such dwelling house as may be determined by the tribunal, or after allowing the tenant, at his option, to remove the materials of the structure provided that the landlord shall not dispose of the site in any manner except by first giving option of purchasing the same for the price determined by the tribunal, to an civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. agricultural labourer, landless person, small holder or a village artisan, who owns no house site, in the said order of priority and where any site is disposed of without giving such option such disposal shall be void provided further that the provisions of section 63 shall apply to the disposal of the site in any manner in a case where the option of purchase is not exercised by any of the persons mentioned in the first proviso.
32.
tenants deemed to have purchased land on tillers day.- 1 on the first day of april 1957 hereinafter referred to as the tillers day every tenant shall, subject to the other provisions of the next succeeding sections, be deemed to have purchased from his landlord, free of all encumbrances subsisting thereon on the said day, the land held by him as tenant, if- a such tenant is a permanent tenant thereof and cultivates land personally b such tenant is not a permanent tenant but cultivates the land leased personally and i the landlord has not given notice of termination of his tenancy under section 31 or ii notice has been given under section 31, but the landlord has not applied to the mamlatdar, on or before the 31st day of march 1957 under section 29 for obtaining possession of the land or iii the landlord has not terminated his tenancy on any of the grounds specified in section 14, or has so terminated the tenancy but has not applied to the mamlatdar on or before the 31st day of march, 1957 civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc . under section 29 for obtaining possession of the land provided that if an application made by the landlord under section 29 for obtaining possession of the land has been rejected by the mamlatdar or by the collector in appeal or in revision by the gujarat revenue tribunal under the provision of this act, the tenant shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the date on which the final order of rejection is passed.
the date on which the final order of rejection is passed is hereinafter referred to as the postponed date provided further that the tenant of a landlord who is entitled to the benefit of the proviso to sub-section 3 of section 31 shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the 1st day of april, 1958, if no separation of his share has been effected before the date mentioned in that proviso. 1a a where a tenant, on account of his eviction from the land by the landlord, before the 1st april, 1957, is not in possession of the land on the said date but has made or makes an application for possession of the land under sub- section 1 of section 29 within the period specified in that sub-section, then if the application is allowed by the mamlatdar, or as the case may be, in appeal by the collector or in revision by the gujarat revenue tribunal, he shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the date on which the final order allowing the application is passed. b where such tenant has not made an application for possession within the period specified in sub-section 1 of section 29 or the application made by him is finally rejected under this act, and the land is held by any other person as tenant on the expiry of the said period or on the date of the final rejection of the application, such other person shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the date of the expiry of the said period or as the case may be, on the date of the final rejection of the application. 1b where a tenant who was in possession of land on the appointed day and who, on account of his being dispossessed of such land or any part thereof by the landlord at any time before the specified date otherwise than in the manner provided in section 29 or any other provision of this act, is not in possession of such and or any part thereof and such land or part thereof is in the civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. possession of the landlord or his successor-in-interest on the said date and such land or part thereof is not put to a non-agricultural use on or before the said date, then the mamlatdar shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said section 29 or any other provision of this act either suo motu or on an application of the tenant made within the prescribed period hold an inquiry and direct that such land or as the case may be, part thereof shall be taken from the possession of the landlord or, as the case may be, his successor in interest, and shall be restored, to the tenant and thereafter, the provisions of this section and sections 32a to 32r both inclusive shall, so far as they may be applicable, apply thereto, subject to the modification that the tenant shall be deemed to have purchased such land or part thereof on the date on which such land or, as the case may be, part thereof is restored to him provided that the tenant shale be entitled to restoration of land or part thereof, as the case may be, under this sub-section only if he gives an undertaking in writing within such period as may be prescribed to cultivate it personally and of so much thereof as together with the other land held by him as owner or tenant shall not exceed the ceiling area provided further that - i if the tenant fails to give such undertaking within such prescribed period, or if the tenant, after giving such undertaking, refuses to accept the tenancy or possession of the lands, the land the possession of which the landlord or as the case may be, his successor-in-interests is not entitled to retain under this sub-section or ii if the tenant gives such undertaking and accepts such tenancy or possession of the land, such portion of the land referred to in clause i to the restoration of which the tenant would not be entitled under the first proviso, shall vest in the state government free from all encumbrances, and shall be disposed of in the manner provided in sub-section 2 of section 32 p. civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. explanation.
- in this sub-section successor in interest means a person who acquires the interest by testamentary disposition or devolution on death. 2 where by custom, usage or agreement or order of a court, any warkas land belonging to the landlord is used by the tenant for the purpose of rab manure in connection with rice cultivation in the land held by him as tenant- a the whole of such warkas land, or b as the case may be, such part thereof as the tribunal may determine in cases where such warkas land, is jointly used by more persons than one for the purposes of rab manure, shall be included in the land to be deemed to have been purchased by the tenant under sub-section 1 provided that in cases referred to in clause b the tribunal may determine that such warkas land shall be jointly held by persons entitled to use the same, if in the opinion of the tribunal, the partition of such warkas land by metes and bounds is neither practicable nor expedient in the interest of such persons. 3 in respect of the land deemed to have been purchased by a tenant under subsection 1 ,- a the tenant shall continue to be liable to pay to the landlord the rent of such land, and b the landlord shall continue to be liable to pay to the state government the dues, if any, referred to in clauses a , b , c and d of sub-section 1 of section 10a, where the tenant is not liable to pay such dues under subsection 3 of that section.
until the amount of the purchase price payable by the tenant to the landlord is determined under section 32h. 4 on the date of the commencement of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands gujarat amendment act, 1960 gujarat xvi of 1960 , every tenant in the areas civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc . within the limits of municipal boroughs act, 1925 bombay xviii of 1925 , or within the limits of municipal districts constituted under the bombay district municipal act, 1901 bombay iii of 1901 , shall, subject to the other provisions of this act, be deemed to have purchased from a landlord free from all encumbrances subsisting thereon on the said date the land held by him as tenant, as if the said date were the tillers day provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to land leased by a landlord and situated within the limits of, any such municipal borough or municipal district, if such land does not exceed an economic holding and the total annual income of the landlord including the rent of such land does not exceed rs. 1,500 and such land is not held under a permanent tenancy. 5 a person eligible to the exemption as provided in the proviso to sub-section 4 , shall make an application before the 1st day of july 1961 to the mamlatdar for a certificate as provided in section 88c, and the provisions of sub-sections 2 to 4 of that section shall apply thereto as if the application had been made under section 88c. 6 the provisions of sections 32s, 32t and 32u shall mutatis mutandis apply to the termination of tenancy of such land by a landlord holding a certificate under sub- section 5 and purchase of such land by the tenant thereof as if such landlord were a certified landlord and such tenant were an excluded tenant within the meaning of those sections.
32a.
tenants deemed to have purchased up to ceiling area- a tenant shall be deemed to have purchased land under section 32 1 in the case of a tenant who does not hold any land as owner but holds land as tenant in excess of the ceiling area, up to the ceiling area 2 in the case of a tenant who holds land as owner below the ceiling area, such part of the land only as will raise his holding to the extent of the ceiling area.
32b.
when tenants not deemed to have purchased lands- if a tenant holds land partly as owner and partly as tenant but the area of the land held as owner is equal to or exceeds the ceiling area, he shall not be deemed to have civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. purchased the land held by him as a tenant under section 32f.
right of tenant to purchase where landlord is minor etc. 1 notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sections,- a where the landlord is a minor or a widow, or a person subject to any mental or physical disability the tenant shall have the right to purchase such land under section 32 within one year from the expiry of the period during which such landlord is entitled to terminate the tenancy under section 31 provided that were a person of such category is a member of a joint family, the provisions of this sub- section shall not apply if at least one member of the joint family is outside the categories mentioned in this sub- section unless before the 31st day of march 1958 the share of such person in the joint family has been separated by metes and bounds and the mamlatdar on inquiry is satisfied that the share of such person in the land is separated, having regard to the area, assessment, classification and value of the land, in the same proportion, as the share of that person in the entire joint family property, and not in a larger proportion. b where the tenant is a minor, or a widow or a person subject to any mental or physical disability or a serving member of the armed forces, then subject to the provisions of clause a , the right to purchase land under section 32 may be exercised- i by the minor within one year from the date on which he attains majority ii by the successor-in-title of the widow within one year from the date on which her interest in the land ceases to exist civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. iii within one year from the date on which the mental or physical disability of the tenant ceases to exist iv within one year from the date on which the tenant ceases to be serving member of the armed forces provided that where a person of such category is a member of a joint family, the provisions of this sub- section shall not apply if at least one member of the joint family is outside the categories mentioned in this sub- section unless before the 31st day of march, 1958 the share of such person in the joint family has been separated by metes and bounds and the mamlatdar on inquiry is satisfied that the share of such person in the land is separated, having regard to the area, assessment, classification and value of the land, in the same proportion as the share of that person in the entire joint family property, and not in a larger proportion. 1a on and after the date of commencement of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands gujarat amendment act, 1960 gujarat xvi of 1960 hereinafter referred to in this sub-section as the said date , every tenant who has not exercised his right of purchase within the period of one year within which it may be exercised under sub-section 1 shall, if the said period has commenced be deemed to have been purchased the land on the said date, whether the period has expired or not and if the period has not commenced, he shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the date on which the period would have commenced but for the provisions of this sub- section. 2 the provisions of sections 32 to 32e both inclusive and sections 32g, to 32r. both inclusive , shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to such purchase.
32h. purchase price and its maxima- 1 subject to the additions and deductions as provided in sub-sections 1a and 1 b , the purchase price shall be reckoned as follows, namely civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. i in the case of a permanent tenant who is cultivating the land personally the purchase price shall be the aggregate of the following amounts, that is to say, a an amount equal to six times the rent of the land b the amount of the arrears of rent, if any, lawfully due on the tillers day or the postponed date c the amounts, if any, paid by or recovered from the landlord as land revenue and cesses referred to in clauses a , b , c and d of sub-section 1 of section 10a, in the event of the failure on the part of the tenant to pay the same ii in the case of other tenants, the purchase price shall be the aggregate of the following amounts, that is to say a such amount as the tribunal may determine not being less than 20 times the assessment and not more than 200 times the assessment. b the value of any structures, wells and embankments constructed and other permanent fixtures made and trees planted by the landlord on the land c the amount of the arrears of rent, if any, lawfully due on the tillers day or the postponed date d the amounts, if any, paid by or recovered from the landlord as land revenue and other cesses referred to in clauses a , b , c and d of sub-section 1 of section 10a, in the event of the civil appeal number2573 of 2020 etc. arising out of slp c number18525 of 2009 etc. vinodchandra sakarlal kapadia etc. vs. state of gujarat and ors.
etc. failure on the part of the tenant to pay the same.
explanation 1. for the purposes of calculating the price under this subsection, the amount of water rate, if any, levied under section 55 of the bombay land revenue code, 1879, and included in such assessment, shall be excluded.
explanation 2. for the purposes of this sub-section, the expression assessment shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 8. 1a where a tenant to whom sub-sections 1 and 2 of section 10a do not apply, has, after the commencement of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands amendment act, 1955, paid in respect of the land held by him as tenant land revenue and other cesses referred to in sub-section 1 of that section, on account of the failure of the landlord to pay the same, a sum equal to the total amount so paid by the tenant until the date of the determination of the purchase price shall be deducted from the aggregate of the amounts determined under sub- section 1 . 1b a on the amount arrived at in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections 1 and 1a , there shall be calculated interest at 4 per cent.
per annum for the period between the date on which the tenant is deemed to have purchased the land under section 32 and the date of the determination of the purchase price. b i the amount of interest so calculated shall be added to, and ii the amount of rent, if any, paid by the tenant to the landlord and the value of any products of trees planted by the landlord if such products are removed by the landlord during the said period shall be deducted from, the amount so arrived at. 2 the state government may, by general or special order, fix different minima and maxima for the purpose of sub-clause a of clause ii of sub-section 1 in respect of any kind of land held by tenants in any backward area.
in civil appeal number2573