--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal number 986 of 2007 pandurang chandrakant mhatre ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

appellants versus state of maharashtra respondent judgement r.m. lodha, j. this criminal appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of the high court of judicature at bombay whereby the division bench of that court upturned the judgment of acquittal passed by the iind additional sessions judge, raigad in respect of the present appellants and convicted them for the offences punishable under section 302 read with section 149, section 326 read with 149 and section 148, ipc and sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for life and different period of sentence under other counts along with fine and default stipulation.
2. nineteen persons were arraigned before the trial court for the offences under sections 147, 148, 302 read with section 149, section 302 read with section 34, section 307 read with section 149 and section 326 read with section 149, ipc.
trial court acquitted all of them.
the prosecution challenged the judgment of acquittal before the high court of judicature at bombay.
the high court granted leave to appeal against fourteen accused persons only.
as against remaining five accused, leave was refused.
during the pendency of appeal, one of the accused, against whom leave was granted, died.
of the remaining thirteen accused, the division bench affirmed acquittal of five.
the division bench convicted eight accused as indicated above.
3. before dealing with the points raised in the appeal, it is appropriate to set out very briefly the prosecution case.
phunde, a small village in taluka uran, district raigad, maharashtra has two groups one group is politically associated with the peasants and workers party pwp while the other group has alliance with the congress i party.
the party of the assailants belong to pwp and the prosecution witnesses belong to congress-i party.
the deceased was also a congress-i party worker.
the relations between the two groups due to party politics seem to have been strained for quite some time.
several criminal cases have been lodged by these two groups against each other.
on the outskirts of the village phunde, there is a temple popularly known as gurbadevi temple.
the said temple celebrates every year an annual fair with pomp and show a jagran is held in the night on the said occasion.
on april 2, 1988, the annual fair at gurbadevi temple was being celebrated the idol was adorned with ornaments and the entire temple complex was illuminated with electric lights.
in the night, the villagers gathered in the temple for jagran.
the group belonging to congress i party took active part in the management of the said fair.
the celebrations continued until midnight.
thereafter, most of the villagers left the temple.
however, 15-20 persons who were in management of the said festival stayed back to keep watch over the ornaments adorned by the idol.
few of those who stayed back were chit-chatting in sabhamandap, while some of them were simply resting and others kept themselves awake by playing cards.
in the intervening night of april 2, 1988 and april 3, 1988 at about 3 - 3.15 a.m., ramesh mhatre a-3 came to the temple, had a look around and then left.
a-3 did not speak to anybody.
about 15-20 minutes thereafter, a-3 returned to the temple with a group of about 20 persons.
all of them were allegedly armed with weapons like iron bar, swords, pharashi, sticks etc. as soon as they reached, they are said to have started attacking the people assembled there.
pandurang chandrakant mhatre a-2 and ramesh mhatre a-3 gave iron-bar blows on the back of nandkumar mhatre pw-2 but he escaped and ran towards the village.
the accused persons started shouting dhara-dhara mara-mara.
then, they assaulted suresh atmaram gharat deceased , sudin mhatre pw-4 , namdeo mhatre pw-5 , laxman mhatre pw-6 , gopal thakur pw-7 , mahindra mhatre pw-8 and mahesh bhoir pw-10 .
suresh atmaram mhatre, ran towards uran- panvel road but the accused persons chased him.
maninath shanker a-12 assaulted him with sword.
the other accused persons assaulted him with sticks and iron bars.
as a result of that assault, suresh atmaram gharat sustained serious injuries.
pw-2 rushed towards village and shouted for help by saying that pwp workers were assaulting their congress-i party members.
hearing this, the villagers rushed towards gurabadevi temple.
pw-2 then went to nhava sheva police station where he reached at about 4.15 a.m. april 3, 1988 .
on reaching at nava sheva police station, pw-2 found that namdeo mhatre pw-5 was already sitting in the police station who had conveyed to the police that persons from rival party pwp have assaulted the persons from their party and, that arrangements be made in sending the police party.
psi anil tamaichekar pw-18 alongwith two police constables and pw-2 immediately left for the temple in a police jeep.
on his way to village phunde, pw-18 made enquiries from the persons who were crying and he came to know that the injured persons have been taken to uran dispensary.
when he reached uran dispensary, he was informed that seriously injured persons have been sent to sion hospital, bombay.
pw-18 then went to the place of occurrence and from there he proceeded for nhava sheva police station.
on his way, pw-18 came across one ambulance carrying injured persons.
pw-18 was informed that one of the injured persons viz., suresh atmaram gharat was dead.
pw-18 and pw-2 then immediately went to nhava sheva police station.
pw-2 lodged the complaint exh.
31 based on which a criminal case c.r. number 17/88 was registered at 6.00 a.m. on april 3, 1988 for the offences under sections 302, 147, 148, 149, 323, 114, 307 and 326, ipc.
the investigation into the crime was commenced by pw-18 he prepared inquest panchnama exh.67 spot panchnama exh.
32 and recorded the statements of some witnesses in the vicinity of scene of offence.
the investigation was then taken over by shantaram waghmare, assistant commissioner of police pw- 17 and changed hands as pw-17 was transferred.
as the accused persons were not traceable, the investigating officer searched them vigorously.
six accused persons were arrested on may 26, 1988 nine were arrested on may 28, 1988 and the remaining four were arrested on august 16, 1988.
for the period from may 28, 1988 to august 18, 1988, on different dates at the instance of different accused persons, weapons of assault were recovered.
the investigation took long time of about 4-5 months.
4. the postmortem of dead body of suresh atmaram gharat was conducted on april 3, 1988 by dr. bhujang bawa pw-11 , medical officer, uran dispensary.
pw-11 also medically examined injured witnesses on the same day six of them were sent to the sion hospital, bombay for treatment as they received serious injuries.
upon completion of all necessary formalities in the investigation, the challan was submitted by the investigating officer before the judicial magistrate, first class, uran against kamlakar shrawan thakur a-1 , pandurang chandrakant mhatre a-2 , ramesh raman chandrakant mhatre a-3 , parshuram chandrakant mhatre a-4 , ashok yadav mhatre a-5 , damodar vasant gharat a- 6 , vinod trimbak mhatre a-7 , prakash pandurang thakur a- 8 , mahesh pandurang gharat a-9 , ramchandra raghunath mhatre a-10 , mahesh shankar gharat a-11 , maninath shankar gharat a-12 , mukund moreshwar mhatre a-13 , ganpat raghunath mhatre a-14 , bhushan balchandra mhatre a-15 , dayanand mahadeo mhatre a-16 , rupendra shripat mhatre a-17 , nitin kamalakar thakur a-18 and prakash madhukar mhatre a-19 .
as offences like 302 and 307 were exclusively triable by the court of sessions, the judicial magistrate, first class, committed the aforesaid accused persons to the court of sessions judge, raigad-alibagh.
the case was transferred to the court of iind additional sessions judge, raigad-alibag for trial.
5. pw-11 found following injuries on the body of the deceased 1 incised wound over the left iliac fossa, vertical skin deep, 8 x cm. 2 incised wound over the head 4 cm above the occipital.
vertical 3 x cm.
bone deep 3 c.l.w.
over the right upper arm in the middle on lateral side 4 x 4 cm. with fracture of the right humerus m/3. 4 c.l.w.
just below the right tibial tuberosity 3 x 3 cm. irregular with fracture of tribia and fibula u/3. 5 c.l.w.
over the right shin over lower/3 on anterior side 2 x 2 cm.
with a fracture of tibia and fibula l/3. 6 fracture of left radius and ulna l/3.
the aforesaid injuries on the body of deceased were found ante-mortem by pw-11.
6. laxman mhatre pw-6 was initially taken to the uran dispensary and from there he was taken to sion hospital, bombay on april 3, 1988 itself.
he was found to have sustained following injuries vide exh.
87 i clw r fo region 2 x 1 bd ii s/7/d l uina m/3 number dwd clw 1 x scd l/3rd ulna pw m/3 ulna clinically m/3 ulna contamination iii open injury r elbow clw 2 x 1 bd vertically splitting olecranon with impression r trochlea no dwd iv s/7/d r ankle no dwd v tenderness r gluteal region.
vi number spine pelvis ribs clinically x-ray l ulna m/3 r olecranon compo vertical soft tissue r ankle injury.
7. vithal pandurang mhatre pw-3 was also taken to sion hospital, bombay on april 3, 1988.
he was discharged on may 14, 1988.
at the time of admission in the hospital, the following injuries were found on his person vide exh.
88 1 amputation r thumb with thumb held by skin tag. 2 i w r thigh subcutaneous deep 1 x 8.
sudin mhatre pw-4 was admitted in sion hospital on april 3, 1980.
he remained there as indoor patient for three days and was discharged on april 6, 1988.
at the time of his admission in the sion hospital, he was found to have sustained the following injuries vide exh.
89 1 clw vertex 10 cm 2 outer table skull 9.
mahindra lalji mhatre pw-8 was admitted at sion hospital on april 3, 1988 and was discharged on april 5, 1988.
at the time of his admission in sion hospital, he was found suffering from the following injuries vide exh.
90 1 clw sintered forehead 1 2 clw occipital 1 3 clw mucosal aspect lower lip area 4 multiple inj on back 10.
namdeo yadav mhatre pw-5 sustained the following injuries 1. abrasion over the back at lumbar region 2 x 2 cm with irregular margin.
2. abrasion over rt.intra-axillary area 3 x 3 cm with irregular margin.
3. abrasion over the left elbow jt. 1 x 1 cm irregular in margin.
11.
mahesh kashinath bhoir pw-10 was also injured in the incident and he suffered the following simple injuries wheelmark over the epigastric region 6 x 2 cm vertical with irregular margin.
12.
the prosecution sought to establish its case by tendering nine eye-witnesses in evidence, viz., pw-2, pw-3, pw-4, pw-5, pw-6, pw-7, pw-8, pw-9 and pw-10.
many of them were injured.
the accused persons denied that they had anything to do with the offences charged.
their defence was that a false case has been made against them by the aforesaid prosecution witnesses.
a-2 pleaded alibi in his defence.
13.
the trial court rejected the evidence of eye- witnesses holding that because of a sudden attack, all the prosecution witnesses ran helter-skelter and everybody tried to run away from the accused to save their life and in a situation like this they must not have been in a position to see actually who assaulted them.
the trial court held that the evidence regarding assault on suresh atmaram gharat was not specific and as he deceased ran from the temple, the attack on him took place at some distance from the temple and being a night time, none of the witnesses could see the attack on the deceased from the short distance, say about 5 to 10.
the trial court observed that although pw-5 reached the nhava sheva police station at about 4 to 4.15 a.m. and gave information about the incident, but the fir was registered at 6.00 a.m. at the instance of pw-2.
from this, the trial court drew the inference that pw-18 and pw-2 must have pondered over the matter for false implication of the accused in the offence.
the trial court, thus, acquitted all the accused persons.
14.
the high court, however, reversed the conclusion of the trial court in respect of eight accused persons.
the high court held that in the intervening night of april 2, 1988 and april 3, 1988 at about 3 to 3.30 a.m., there was an unlawful assembly of which a-2, a-3, a-4, a-5, a-6, a-10, a-11 and a-12 were the members.
the high court also held that all the accused were armed with deadly weapons like sword, iron bars, pharshi, sticks and their common object was to make a murderous attack on suresh atmaram gharat.
the high court, after setting aside the order of acquittal against a-2 to a-6, a-10, a-11 and a-12, convicted them for the offence punishable under section 302 read with 149, i.p.c. and sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for life.
the high court also convicted these accused persons for other offences and punished them for lesser sentence with fine and default stipulations.
15.
mr. r. sundaravardan, learned senior counsel addressed the principal arguments before us on behalf of appellant numbers 1 to 3.
mr. a.k. srivastava, learned senior counsel made submissions for appellant numbers 4 to 6 and mr. shekhar naphade, learned senior counsel argued for appellant number 8.
16.
mr. r. sundaravardan, learned senior counsel submitted that fir a-31 is no fir in law as it is hit by the prohibition contained in section 162 of cr.p.c.
he would submit that fir a-31 is of doubtful authenticity as it lacks spontaneity and delay in its registration.
according to him, fir ought to have been registered in the first instance on the information of pw-5 or in any case on the information given by pw-2 at 4.30 a.m. instead, pw-18 io takes pw-1 to the scene of occurrence, meets the villagers and ambulance on the way, dispatches the dead body to the hospital for the post-mortem, goes to the village and thereafter proceeds to the police station along with pw-2 and registers the purported fir a-31 with coloured version, exaggerated accounts and concocted story against whom the prosecution party has a grudge.
learned senior counsel also submitted that there was gross violation of section 157, cr.p.c.
inasmuch as fir in the court was received on april 12, 1988, although the occurrence took place on april 3, 1988.
he relied upon the decisions of this court in meharaj singh l nk. v. state of u.p.1 t.t. antony v. state of kerala ors.2 and ramesh baburao devaskar ors.
v. state of maharashtra3.
the learned senior counsel, thus, submitted that there is genuine doubt as to the time, date and manner in which purported fir a-31 was recorded and police is guilty of having not disclosed the whole correct story to the court.
17. learned senior counsel would contend that the evidence of witnesses, who professed themselves as eye- witnesses deserved to be rejected as they belong to rival political parties in a faction ridden village.
moreover, they are related to each other as well as the deceased.
these witnesses have been examined at much belated stage by police some of them after nine days.
learned counsel would urge that one or other of these prosecution witnesses are themselves accused in sessions case in some cases accused were witness complainant against them and some of the prosecution witnesses parents were convicted for life.
their testimony is also not corroborated by any doctor from sion hospital as no 1994 5 scc 188 2001 6 scc 181 2007 13 scc 501 doctor from that hospital was examined and that their evidence suffers from vital contradictions, omissions, exaggerations and improvements.
in this regard, the learned senior counsel took us through the evidence of pw-2, pw-3, pw-4, pw-5, pw-6, pw-7, pw-8 and pw-9.
he also submitted that evidence of pw-3, pw-4 and pw-8 is hearsay evidence and, therefore, no evidence in the eye of law.
18. learned senior counsel vehemently contended that investigation in the present case is an example of one of the most unfair investigation inasmuch as the certificate regarding a-2, as to his absence from scene though procured by pw-17, yet, was kept away from the court.
he also cited late recording of the fir after having taken several steps of investigation as yet another glaring example of unfair investigation.
on top of it, he would submit that fir reached the concerned court after nine days of incident.
19.
mr. r. sundaravardan, learned senior counsel also contended that plea of alibi set up by a-2 is established by the evidence of dw-1 who is an officer of nad.
learned senior counsel also submitted that from the prosecution evidence, the doubt about the place of occurrence has not been cleared and that prosecution has failed to establish the availability of adequate light at the site which could have enabled the witnesses in fact see the incident.
20. learned senior counsel strenuously urged that the trial court has given cogent and convincing reasons for acquitting the appellants but the high court without justifiable reasons and, rather, on flimsy grounds interfered with the judgment of the acquittal.
21.
lastly, learned senior counsel, without prejudice to the afore-noticed submissions, urged that there was no evidence to show that there was common object of the unlawful assembly to commit murder of suresh atmaram gharat.
he invited our attention to the finding recorded by the high court at page 39 of the slp paper book wherein the high court recorded that common object of the unlawful assembly was to cause grievous hurt.
learned senior counsel would urge that there was no specific evidence to show that suresh atmaram gharat died because of any particular blow.
according to him, the high court although held that for six injuries on the person of deceased, as per post-mortem report, nine accused cannot be held guilty yet the high court came to the conclusion that common object of the unlawful assembly was to commit murder.
the learned senior counsel submitted that when there was doubt as to who inflicted the fatal blow, as in the present case, safe course is to convict the accused under sections 326 or 304 part-ii, ipc.
in this regard, the learned senior counsel relied upon large number of decisions, viz., state of haryana v. prabhu ors4 sarwan singh ors.etc.
v. state of punjab5 ram anjore and others.
v. state of u.p.6 gokul others v. state of rajasthan7 md.
isak md.
others v. state of maharashtra8 ninaji raoji baudha another v. state of maharashtra9 nattan v. state of tamil nadu10 mariadasan others v. state of tamil nadu11 bharwad bhikha natha others v. state of gujarat12 harshadsingh pahelvansingh thakore v. state of gujarat13 bhajan singh and others v. state air 1979 sc 1019 air 1978 sc 1525 air 1975 sc 185 air 1972 sc 209 air 1979 sc 1434 air 1976 sc 1537 air 1976 sc 2197 air 1980 sc 573 air 1977 sc 1768 air 1977 sc 710 of punjab14 bansropan singh and others v. state of bihar15 sarman others v. state of m.p.16 22.
on behalf of appellant number 8 a-12 , separate written submissions have been filed.
while adopting the arguments advanced by mr. r. sundaravardan, it is contended on behalf of appellant number 8 that the unexplained delay in dispatch of fir would create suspicion about the contents of the fir and the evidence of the eye-witnesses.
in this regard, reliance has been placed on ishwar singh v. state of u.p17 radhakrishnan nair v. state of kerala18 chotu v. state of haryana19 palia v. state of punjab20 bathula nagamalleswara rao and ors.
v. state rep. by public prosecutor21 mahmood and anr.
v. state of u.p.22 state of punjab v. avtar singh23 state of punjab v. gurdip kaur24 and ramesh baburao devaskar and others v. state of maharashtra25.
it is also contended that although the trial court recorded the finding to air 1978 sc 1759 air 1983 sc 166 air 1993 sc 400.
air 1976 sc 2423 1995 suppl 1 scc 217 1996 scc crl. 1161 1997 scc crl. 383 2008 11 scc 722 2008 crl.
law journal 696 2008 14 scale 368 2009 1 scc 120 2007 13 scc 501 the effect that there was violation of mandatory provisions contained in section 157 of cr.p.c.
which is fatal for prosecution case, the high court has not considered this aspect at all which is a serious infirmity.
in this regard, reliance has been placed on chandu v. state of maharashtra26 kashiram ors.
v. state of m.p.27 and harijana thirupala ors.
v. public prosecutor a.p., hyderabad28.
a contention has also been raised on behalf of the appellant number 8 about the inadmissibility of site plan exh.
29 .
reliance has been placed in this regard on the decision of this court in the case of ram ratan others v. state of rajasthan29.
23. on the other hand, ms. madhavi divan, state counsel, supported the judgment of the high court.
24. in meharaj singh, this court explained the consequences that may ensue due to delay in dispatching fir to the magistrate in the following words one of the checks is the receipt of the copy of the fir, called a special report in a murder case, by the local magistrate.
if this report is received by the magistrate late it can give rise to an inference that the fir was not lodged at the time it is alleged to have been recorded, unless, of course 2002 9 scc 408 2002 1 scc 71 2002 6 scc 470 1962 3 scr 590 the prosecution can offer a satisfactory explanation for the delay in despatching or receipt of the copy of the fir by the local magistrate.
prosecution has led no evidence at all in this behalf .
25.
in the case of t.t. antony, it has been held by this court that there can be no second fir.
while dealing with section 154 and other relevant provisions, this court said 18. an information given under sub-section 1 of section 154 cr.p.c is commonly known as first information report fir though this term is not used in the code.
it is a very important document.
and as its nickname suggests it is the earliest and the first information of a cognizable offence recorded by an officer in charge of a police station.
it sets the criminal law in motion and marks the commencement of the investigation which ends up with the formation of opinion under section 169 or 170 cr.p.c, as the case may be, and forwarding of a police report under section 173 cr.p.c.
it is quite possible and it happens not infrequently that more informations than one are given to a police officer in charge of a police station in respect of the same incident involving one or more than one cognizable offences.
in such a case he need not enter every one of them in the station house diary and this is implied in section 154 cr.p.c.
apart from a vague information by a phone call or a cryptic telegram, the information first entered in the station house diary, kept for this purpose, by a police officer in charge of a police station is the first information report -- fir postulated by section 154 cr.p.c.
all other informations made orally or in writing after the commencement of the investigation into the cognizable offence disclosed from the facts mentioned in the first information report and entered in the station house diary by the police officer or such other cognizable offences as may come to his notice during the investigation, will be statements falling under section 162 cr.p.c.
no such information statement can properly be treated as an fir and entered in the station house diary again, as it would in effect be a second fir and the same cannot be in conformity with the scheme of cr.p.c 19.
the scheme of cr.p.c is that an officer in charge of a police station has to commence investigation as provided in section 156 or 157 cr.p.c on the basis of entry of the first information report, on coming to know of the commission of a cognizable offence.
on completion of investigation and on the basis of the evidence collected, he has to form an opinion under section 169 or 170 cr.p.c, as the case may be, and forward his report to the magistrate concerned under section 173 2 cr.p.c.
however, even after filing such a report, if he comes into possession of further information or material, he need not register a fresh fir he is empowered to make further investigation, normally with the leave of the court, and where during further investigation he collects further evidence, oral or documentary, he is obliged to forward the same with one or more further reports this is the import of sub-section 8 of section 173 cr.p.c.
20. from the above discussion it follows that under the scheme of the provisions of sections 154, 155, 156, 157, 162, 169, 170 and 173 cr.p.c only the earliest or the first information in regard to the commission of a cognizable offence satisfies the requirements of section 154 cr.p.c.
thus there can be no second fir and consequently there can be no fresh investigation on receipt of every subsequent information in respect of the same cognizable offence or the same occurrence or incident giving rise to one or more cognizable offences.
on receipt of information about a cognizable offence or an incident giving rise to a cognizable offence or offences and on entering the fir in the station house diary, the officer in charge of a police station has to investigate not merely the cognizable offence reported in the fir but also other connected offences found to have been committed in the course of the same transaction or the same occurrence and file one or more reports as provided in section 173 cr.p.c.
26.
in the case of ramesh baburao devaskar, this court observed 18.
a first information report cannot be lodged in a murder case after the inquest has been held.
the first information report has been lodged on the basis of the statements made by pw 11 to the informant himself at the spot.
if the said prosecution witness who claimed himself to be the eyewitness was the person who could lodge a first information report, there was absolutely no reason as to why he himself did not become the first informant.
the first information report was recorded on the basis of his information given to the first informant at the spot.
all information given by him to pw 13 was made before the investigating officer himself.
what prevented him from lodging the first information report is beyond our comprehension.
pw 11, we may place on record, categorically stated that he had disclosed the details of information to all concerned.
therefore, it is expected that the first informant was informed thereabout.
we have noticed hereinbefore that the information given by pw 13 had at least been recorded by the police in the crime register and he categorically stated a few facts viz.
the main accused accused 9 committed murder of his brother shivaji patil and one baburao patil.
even the place where the murder took place was known to him.
if we are to believe the investigating officer, he recorded the statement after holding inquest.
the detailed report in regard to the nature of injuries as also the place where the injuries were inflicted was known to him as inquest report had already been prepared.
such an attempt on the part of the investigating officer has been deprecated by this court in a large number of decisions.
all other witnesses including the panch witnesses must have been present there.
if despite the same, according to panch witnesses, at least in respect of baburao, unknown persons are said to be his assailants, it is evident that pw 11 did not disclose the names of the assailants at least all of them before pw 9 as also the investigating officer.
27.
in dharma rama bhagare v. state of maharashtra30, this court held that fir is never treated as a substantive piece of evidence it can only be used for corroborating or contradicting its maker when he appears in court as a witness. 1973 1 scc 537 28.
in the case of vikram and ors.
v. state of maharashtra31, this court noticed it may be true that p.w. 2 had informed the officer in charge of the police station on telephone, but the circumstances in which the said call had to be made has been noticed by us heretobefore.
the head constable states that he had written down the same but then it must have been a cryptic report and only for the purpose of visiting the scene of occurrence.he as well as the investigating officer did not say that it was a detailed report.
if, in the aforementioned premise, another first information report which was a detailed one came to be recorded, no exception can be taken to the same being treated as a first information report.
29.
it is fairly well settled that first information report is not a substantive piece of evidence and it can be used only to discredit the testimony of the maker thereof and it cannot be utilized for contradicting or discrediting the testimony of other witnesses.
in other words, the first information report cannot be used with regard to the testimony of other witnesses who depose in respect of incident.
it is equally well settled that the earliest information in regard to commission of a cognizable offence is to be treated as first information report.
it sets the criminal law in motion and the investigation commences on that basis.
although first information report is not expected to jt2007 7 sc 215 be encyclopedia of events but an information to the police to be first information report under section 154 1 , must contain some essential and relevant details of the incident.
a cryptic information about commission of a cognizable offence irrespective of the nature and details of such information may not be treated as first information report.
the question is whether the information regarding the incident ex.61 entered in the general diary of nhava sheva police station given by pw-5 is the first information report within the meaning of section 154, cr.p.c.
if the answer is in affirmative, obviously first information report a-31 is hit by section 162 cr.p.c.
30.
it is true that pw-5 reached the police station at about 4.00 - 4.15 a.m. he gave information that several persons were assaulting members of their party that the accused were armed with deadly weapons and that police should immediately leave for the place of occurrence.
this information ex.61 was entered in general diary of the police station.
based on this information, pw-18 left for the place of occurrence alongwith pw-2 who had also reached the police station by that time.
the circumstances in which pw-18 had to leave before recording a formal first information are obvious as the first priority before him was to control the incident since by that time none had died.
in a situation such as the present one, it cannot be said that the moment pw-18 left the police station, the investigation had commenced.
the object and purpose of giving information ex.61 by pw-2 was to request the officer in charge of the police station to reach the place of occurrence.
no doubt pw-18 io had left for scene of occurrence on the basis of entry in the general diary ex.61 recorded at the instance of pw-5 and he visited the scene of occurrence and dispensary but effectively neither the inquest was carried out before registration of fir nor any step towards investigation was taken before the lodging of first information report a-31 .
in an incident where large number of accused are involved in assaulting rival village folk, obviously the first task of the police officer pw-18 is to ensure visit to the scene of occurrence and provide police help, if necessary.
rather, it would have been unnatural on the part of pw-18 to have insisted on taking down the entire incident by way of first information report when pw-5 reached the police station at about 4.00 to 4.15 a.m. for getting help for the victims.
the immediate task for pw-18 was to focus on providing help to the victims who, as per the version of pw-5, were still being attacked.
in the circumstances, fir a-31 is not affected by any legal infirmity.
31.
as regards delayed receipt of the copy of fir by the court of magistrate on april 12, 1988, in the first place exhibit 84 - fir register indicates that copy of fir was sent to the concerned magistrate on april 3, 1988 itself.
secondly, and more importantly, if the evidence of eye- witnesses is found cogent, convincing and credible, the delay in receipt of the copy of fir by the concerned court would not be of much significance.
32.
it is, therefore, important to examine whether high court committed any error in accepting the evidence of pw-2, pw-3, pw-4, pw-5, pw-6, pw-7, pw-8, pw-9 and pw-10.
the learned senior counsel criticised the testimony of these eye-witnesses for various reasons viz., that they belong to rival political parties in a faction ridden village that they are related to each other as well as deceased and that