--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner g.s. lamba ors.
vs. respondent union of india ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

date of judgment22/03/1985 bench desai, d.a. bench desai, d.a. khalid, v. j citation 1985 air 1019 1985 scr 3 431 1985 scc 2 604 1985 scale 1 563 citator info er 1985 sc1605 16 r 1986 sc 638 12,15,16,20 f 1987 sc 424 24 f 1987 sc 716 13 rf 1987 sc2359 17,18 d 1988 sc 535 24 apl 1989 sc 278 19 f 1990 sc1256 22,32 act constitution of india, 1950 articles 14 and 16 service-constitution of-recruitment from more then one source and quota prescribed for each source-quota rule of recruitment inter linked with rota rule of seniority- deviation and departure in implementation of service rule- interference whether artises.
indian foreign service, branch b recruitment, cadre, seniority and promotion rules 1964, rules 13,21 4 and 25 i ii 2f and 29 a promotees and direct recruits- fixation of seniorty-promotees promoted to substantive vacancies on temporary basis-continuous officiation whether confers advantage of seniority over later recruits.
power of relaxation of statutory service rules-failure to record reasons-whether quota fixed for direct recruitment can be relaxed.
headnote the indian foreign service branch b was constitued in 1956.
the statutory rules indian foreign service branch recruitment, cadre, seniority and promotion rules, 1964 came into force from may 6, 1964.
commencing from the advent of the rules, recruitment from three sources were made i direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination held by the union public service commission, ii substantive appointment of persons included in the selective list promoted on the basis of a limited competitive examination held by the u.p.s.c.
and iii promotion on the basis of seniority.
rule 13 provided for recruitment to posts in the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre, and that temporary vacancies shall be filled by appointment of persons included in the select list.
rule 21 laid down a general provision for fixing of seniority, while sub-rule 4 thereof, provided that persons promoted or recruited on the basis of an earlier selection or recruitment, shall be senior to those promoted or recruited on the basis of an earlier 432 selection or recruitment, shall be senior to those promoted or recruited on the basis of a subsequent selection or recruitment.
rule 22 to 24 provided for seniority inter-se of direct recruits, and seniority inter-se of officers promoted to a grade on the recommendations of a departmental promotion committee.
rule 25 provided for seniority inter-se of the officers appointed to a grade from different sources.
by a notification dated february 12, 1975, rule 13 was amended to provide that recruitment to the three different sources of integrated grades ii and iii to be i 1/6th of the substantive vacancies to be filled in by direct recruitment, ii 33 1/3 of the remaining 5/6 of the vacancies to be filled on the basis of results of the limited competitive examination, and iii the remaining vacancies to be filled in by promotion on the basis of seniority.
the petitioners in the writ petitions were selected by the union public service commission according to the merits obtained at the examination of assistants conducted for the purpose for appointment to the post, and allocated to the ministry of external affairs.
after the initial constitution of the service in 1956, they were offered an option whether they would like to join the i.f.s. branch b in grade iv.
they opted and were inducted into the service later they were promoted between 1976 and 1979 from grade iv to the integrated grades ii and iii .
the government of india published a seniority list of the integrated grades ii and iii as on june 25, 1979 and before objections taken by the petitioners to the seniority list were dealt with, another seniority list was published on june 30 1983.
the petitioners assailed the aforesaid seniority lists as violative of the constitutionally guaranteed equality of opportunity in the matter of public service in as much as direct recruits who came into the service long after the departmental promotees were regularly promoted have been assigned seniority over the earlier promoted departmental promotees.
it was further contended, that the seniority list of june 30, 1983 was objectionable as it leaves blank spaces for future recruits either as direct recruits or by limited departmental examination and who are yet to come into the service to be placed over promotees like the petitioners who were already in service for a long time.
the seniority lists having been drawn up on the principles of quota-rota and on the facts of the case and the relevant rules were violative of articles 14 and 16.
the writ petitions were contested by the central governments contending that the seniority lists were drawn up in accordance with the principles governing seniority in the grade as per rule 25, and that were recruitment to a service was from more than one source and each source was assigned a quota of vacancies, the seniority was to be determined according to rota keeping in view the available vacancies to each source while departmental promotion is made after the departmental promotion committee makes recommendations recruitment through examination is time consuming there is a time gap between publication of results and joining of candidates and it is therefore not practically possible to strictly adhere to the quota in any particular year.
the administration 433 overcame this difficulty by rotation of vacancies ensuring that over a period of time the required quota was fully met.
blank spaces were left in the seniority list for giving seniority to persons who have still not joined service and are likely to join at an uncertain date.
this process would not push down the seniority of the petitioners as they would occupy the same serial number in the seniority list.
when the writ petitions were being heard, respondent number 26 appeared and contested the claim of the petitioners contending that all assistants in grade iv who put in the required number of years of service were eligible for participating in the limited departmental examination, promotions based on the result of such an examination would therefore not be violative of art.
14 delay in holding of the examination cannot work to the disadvantage of those who had taken the examination and qualified for promotion and therefore they should be accommodated in the vacancies which had come into existence and where available for the quota from the date the vacancies came into existence.
the two seniority lists were consequently valid and in consonance with the statutory rules.
allowing the writ petitions, held 1 the impugned seniority lists challenged by the petitioners have been drawn up in violation of the provisions of arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution and therefore they are quashed.
the first respondent is directed to draw up fresh seniority list.
all promotions granted since the filing of the petitions must be readjusted.
460b- c in the instant case, direct recruitment had not been made for years.
limited competitive examination had also not been held for years.
promotions from the select list had been presumably in excess of the quota but the promotees were appointed to substantive vacancies in the service and had been holding the posts as in the case of the petitioners for over 6 to 8 years.
the promotions were not styled as temporary, adhoc or stop gap.
the impugned seniority lists were drawn up by rotating vacancies for each source, and if no recruitment was made from that source in a given year, the place in the list available to that source was kept open and a later recruit at any distance of time from that source would be assigned that place over persons who were already recruited from other sources and would be working in substantive vacancies.
the direct recruit thus scores a march over a promotee.
the seniority list is consequently violative of articles 14 and 16 and therefore deserves to be quashed.
453e c-d 2 once the promotees were promoted regularly to substantive vacancies even if temporary unless there was a chance of their demotion to the lower cadre, there continuous officiation confers on them an advantage of being senior to the later recruits under rule 21 4 .
if by the enormous departure or by the power to relax, the quota rule was not adhered to, the rota rule 434 for inter-se seniority as prescribed in rule 25 i ii cannot be given effect, in the absence of any other valid principle of seniority it is well established that continuous officiation in the cadre, grade or service will provide a valid principle of seniority.
the seniority lists having not been prepared on this principle are liable to be quashed and set aside.
459g-h 460a 3 where recruitment to a service or a cadre is from more than one source, the controlling authority can prescribe quota for each source.
where the quota is prescribed, a rule of seniority by rotating the vacancies can be a valid rule for seniority.
however if the rule of seniority is inextricably inter twined with the quota rule and there is enormous deviation from the quota rule, it would be unjust, inequitous and unfair to give effect to the rota rule.
456b-c a. janardhana v. union of india ors.
1983 2 scr 936.
s. gupta v union of india 1975 suppl.
scr 491., a.k. subramana v. union of india 1973 2 scr 979., p.s. mahal and others v. union of india ors.
air 1984 sc 1291., o.p. singla and anr.
v. union of india ors.
air 1984 sc 1595, s c. jaisinghania v. union of india ors.
1967 2 scr 703, bishan sarup gupta etc v. union of india ors.
11975 i scr 104, referred to. 4 what is known in service jurisprudence as seniority according to continuous officiation in the cadre from the grade has been statutorily recognised in rule 21 4 .
this is in tune with fairplay and justice and ensures equality as mandated by art.
16.
454e 5 a block of recruits in a given year coming from three independent sources may be integrated inter-se according to quota and rota.
the block in a subsequent year would be always junior to the bloc of recruits in the earlier years.
this is how rules 21 4 and 25 i ii can be harmoniously read and it is unquestionable that they operate in two different situations and both have to be given effect to.
455a-b 6 rule 29 a confers power to relax any of the provisions of the 1964 rules and this also comprehends rule 13 1 which prescribes quota.
when the power to relax any of the provisions is exercised, the controlling authority must be of the opinion that it is necessary of expedient so to do for reasons to be recorded in writing.
failure to record reasons will not invalidate the exercise of power.
once the power to relax a mandatory rule exists and action in derogation of the rule has been repeatedly taken year after year, it would be a permissible inference that the action was taken in relaxation of the rule for which the power exists.
457b-c bachand singh and anr.
v. union of india ors.
1972 3 scr 898., montreal street railway company v. normandi, air 1977 p.c. 142., state of u.p. v. manboden lal srivastava 1958 scr 533, n.k. chandan and ors.
v. state of gujarat 1977 i scr 1037, referred to.
435 judgment original jurisdiction writ petition civil number 13248 to 13257 of 1983 under article 32 of the constitution of india madan bhatia and sushil kumar for the petitioners.
n.c. talukdar, m.k ramamurthy, r.n. poddar, a.k nag, and m.a. rehman for the respondents.
respondent number 26 in person.
the judgment of the court was delivered by desai, j. we are back to square one.
the same rigmarole of unending disputes as to inter-se seniority between promotees, direct recruits and recruits as per the result of the limited competitive examination with quota-rota as the guiding star for determining inter se seniority are put in the lap of the court.
this time the service is the indian foreign service branch b ifs b for short .
this service was constituted by the memorandum of govt.
of india, ministry of external affairs dated july 16, 1956.
the service was consisted of two cadres a general cadre and two sub cadres 1 stenographer sub-cadre and 2 cypher sub-cadre forming what is styled as special cadre.
the general cadre comprises 6 grades.
various provisions were made in the memorandum for recruitment to various grades.
para v provided for general conditions of eligibility for appointment in the service at the initial constitution.
para v provided that recruitment to grade l, ii and iii of the general cadre will be made on the recommendations of the senior selection board of which the chairman will be the chairman of the union public service commission or his nominee.
selection to other grades will be made by the junior selection board in consultation with union public service commission.
para viii provided for inter se seniority of persons selected for grades i, ii and iii of the general cadre.
appendix to the memorandum sets out sanctioned strength of posts in various grades of lfs b and the scales of pay attached to each grade.
petitioners were selected by the union public service commission according to the merits obtained at the examination conducted for the purpose in 1955 for appointment to the post of assistant, and were allocated to the ministry of external affairs.
after the initial constitution of the service in 1956 petitioners were offered an option whether they would like to join ifs b in grade lv at the time of its initial constitution.
the memorandum constituting the service provided that future maintenance of the service would be governed by the rules to be promulgated for the purpose by the central govt.
accordingly by its notification dated may 6,1964, the govt.
of india, ministry of external affairs in exercise of all the powers conferred by art.
309, promulgated indian foreign service branch b recruitment, cadre, seniority and promotion rules, 1964 1964 rules for short .
by the afore-mentioned rules, grades ii and ill were integrated and the grade was styled as integrated grade ii and iil in general cadre.
petitioners came to be promoted between 1976-1979 from grade iv to integrated grade ii and iii.
the govt.
of india published a seniority list of officers in the integrated grade il and iii of the general cadre of ifs b as on june 25,1979.
petitioners contend that the seniority list is violative of the constitutionally guaranteed equality of opportunity in the matter of public service in as much as direct recruits who came into service long after the departmental promotees were regularly promoted to the aforementioned grade have been assigned seniority over the earlier promoted departmental promotees.
before objections taken by the petitioners to the seniority list were dealt with the central govt.
in supersession of seniority list dated june 25,1979 published another seniority list of the officers in integrated grade ii and iii of ifs b as on june 30,1983.
petitioners contend that the seniority list dated june 30,1983 suffers from the same vice and is all the more objectionable inasmuch as it leaves blank spaces for future recruits either as direct recruits or by limited departmental examination and who are yet to come into service to be placed over promotees like the petitioners who have already been in service for a long time.
the petitioners contend that the impugned seniority list appears to have been drawn up on the principle of quota-rota and that in the facts of this case and the relevant rules it is violative of art.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
petitioners also assert that if rule 25 13 ii is not construed harmoniously with rule 21 of the 1964 rules, rule 25 1 ii would be violative of the guaranty of equality enshrined in art.
16. to be precise, the contention is that where there is recruitment to a cadre from more than one source and the recruitment has to conform to the quota prescribed for each source, simultaneously interlinking the inter-se seniority in respect of recruits entering service from different sources to the quota for .
each source, if the quota reserved for any source is not filled in for a long time and the vacancies allotted to the source are carried forward and the later day recruits from that source are given deemed seniority over the earlier recruits from the other sources, it has the pernicious tendency to give an undeserved advantage to a later recruit over the earlier recruit and it would be violative of arts.
14 and 16.
if it is held that rule 25 1 ii has precedence over rule 21, then rule 25 1 ii is unconstitutional inasmuch as failure to recruit enough number of persons to the extent of the quota reserved for the source in a reasonable time, in the absence of any power to carry forward vacancies available to that source, the rota rule of seniority would be discriminatory in character and lead to denial of equality in the matter of appointment to public service.
it was submitted in such a situation the rota rule would break down under the weight of massive departure from the quota rule, and the seniority rule.
being inextricable inter-twined with the quota rule if given effect to would be unjust, unfair and inequitous and would be violative of art.
14.
the under secretary in the ministry of external affairs filed an affidavit-in-opposition.
averment in para ii of the petition that petitioners were working as permanent section officers in the integrated grade ii and iii in the general cadre of the ifs b was not controverted.
after referring to rule 13 of the 1964 rules, it was stated that both the impugned seniority lists were drawn up in accordance with the principles governing seniority in the grade as per rule 25.
it was stated that where recruitment to a service or cadre is from more than one source and each source is assigned a quota of vacancies, in order to do justice to recruits from all sources, the seniority is to be determined according to rota keeping in view the available vacancies to each source.
it was conceded that in integrated grade ii and iii, the recruitment is done from three different channels and quotas have been fixed for all these channels, but the recruitment is not done at the same time.
while the depart- g mental promotion is made after departmental promotion committee makes recommendations, the recruitment through examination is time-consuming because there is a time gap between publication of results and joining of candidates.
it was further stated that it is not practically possible to strictly adhere to the quota in any particular year because candidates nominated by the union public service commission may even decline to join service and additional candi dates can be taken from subsequent examinations only.
it was further submitted that the administration overcomes this difficulty by adhering to the quota by rotation of vacancies ensuring that over a period of time, the quota requirement is fully met.
the two impugned seniority lists were sought to be sustained on the footing that by and large quota was adhered to and a slight delay or variation in time schedule would not permit an inference that as the quota rule was not adhered to, the rota rule of seniority cannot be given effect.
replying to the averments made in the petition that vacancies allotted to each source and not filled in at the relevant time were being carried forward for years and that when the carried forward vacancies were filled, the recruits were given retrospective deemed date for seniority relatable to the coming into existence of the vacancy for that source without such a provision being found in the relevant rules, it was stated that vacancies have been carried forward, if at all because of the non-availability of the candidates and in the absence of a stipulation in the relevant rules permitting diversion of vacancies from one quota to another, it was inevitable that the quota of vacancies allotted to a source have to be carried forward.
replying to the averments that in the impugned seniority list blank spaces have been left open for giving seniority to persons who have still not joined the service and are likely to join at some uncertain date, it was submitted that this process would not push down the seniority of the petitioners as they would occupy the same serial number in the seniority list.
when the matter was being heard in the court, one radhey shyam aggarwal, respondent number 26 in the petition appeared and filed his affidavit.
he was recruited to grade iv ifs b in 1964 through the open competitive examination held by union public service commission.
he was promoted to integrated grade ii and lli on the result of the limited departmental competitive examination held by the union public service commission in 1977.
he stated that all assistants in the grade lv who have put in the required number of years of service are eligible for participating in limited departmental examination and that as the equality in this behalf is guaranteed to all those similarly situated, such holding of examination and promotion based on the result of the examination would not violate art.
14.
referring to rule 13, he stated that the recruitment to the integrated grade ii and iii is from three independent sources with quota of vacancies assigned to each, the quota should be more or less adhered to so as not to give any unintended benefit to individuals entering through the source of recruitment over others.
it was stated that accepting the contention of the petitioner would tantamount to giving unintended benefit to the promotees promoted in excess of the quota temporarily.
it was further stated that delay in holding of the examination cannot work to the disadvantage of those who have taken the examination and qualified for promotion and therefore they should be accommodated in the vacancies which have come into existence and were available for the quota from the date the vacancies came into existence notwithstanding the fact that the examination was held at a later date and the results were published still later and appointment was made thereafter.
in short, he submitted that the two seniority lists were valid and in consonance with the statutory rules.
before we proceed to examine the contention of the petitioners on merits, it is necessary to refer to the rules of recruitment and seniority relevant to integrated grade ii and iii.
rule 13 which provides for recruitment to posts in the integrated grade ii and iii of the general cadre reads as under 13.
recruitment to posts in the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre 1. a one sixth of the substantive vacancies, in the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre shall be filled by direct recruitment on the results of competitive examinations held by the commission for this purpose from time to time.
the remaining vacancies shall be filled by the substantive appointment of persons included in the select list for the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre.
such appointments shall be made in order of seniority in the select list except when, for reasons to be recorded in writing, a person is not considered fit for such appointment in his turn.
g b temporary vacancies in the integrated grades ii and ili of the general cadre shall be filled by the appointment of persons included in the select list for the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre.
any vacancies remaining unfilled there after shall be filled first from among the person approved for inclusion in the select list and there after by the temporary promotion on the basis of seniority subject to the rejection of the unfit of permanent officers of grade iv the general cadre and grade ii of the cypher sub-cadre who have rendered not less than eight years of approved service in any one grade or the two grades and are within the range of seniority.
such promotions shall be terminated when persons included in the select list for the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre become available to fill vacancies. 2 the select list referred to in clauses a and b of sub rule l shall be prepared in the following manner i 33-1/3 per cent of the quota for inclusion in the select list shall consist of persons to be promoted on the basis of a limited competitive examination to be held by the commission for this purpose from time to time and ii the rest of the promotion quota for inclusion in the select list shall consist of persons to be promoted on the basis of seniority subject to the rejection of the unfit of the officers of the grade iv of the general cadre and grade ii of the cypher sub-cadre who have rendered not less than eight years of approved service in any one grade or both the grades.
provided that if any person appointed to such a grade is considered for promotion to the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre in accordance with the provisions of this sub-rule, all persons senior - to him in that grade shall also be considered notwithstanding that they may not have rendered eight years of approved service in that grade or grades, as the case may be. 3 the controlling authority shall, from time to time lay.
down the ratio in which the available vacancies in the integrated grades ii and iii of the general cadre shall be filled from grade iv of the general cadre and cypher assistants of the cypher sub-cadre.
this ratio shall be fixed, as far as possible, on the basis of the relative strength of the respective cadre posts.
illustration if the strength of grade iv of the general cadre is 720 and that of the cypher assistants of the cypher sub- cadre 120, the ratio for promotion shall be 6 1. chapter iii contains provisions for fixation of seniority in different grades.
rule 21 lays down a general provision for fixing of seniority.
sub-rule 4 is relevant, which reads as under 21. 4 subject to the other provisions of this rule, persons promoted or recruited earlier on the basis of earlier selection or recruitment shall be senior to those promoted or recruited on the basis of subsequent selection or recruitment.
rule 22, 23 and 24 provide for seniority inter-se of direct recruits, seniority inter-se of officers promoted on the results of limited competitive examination and seniority inter-se of officers promoted to a grade on the recommendations of a departmental promotion committee respectively but amongst themselves.
then comes rule 25 which provides for seniority inter-se of the officers appointed to a grade from different sources.
it reads as under 25.
seniority inter-se of the officers appointed to a grade from different sources. 1 integrated grade 11 iii of the general cadre. i the eligible persons in grade iv of the general cadre and cypher assistants of the cypher sub cadre shall be arranged in separate lists in the order on their relative seniority in their respective grades.
thereafter the departmental promotion committee shall select persons for promotion from each list upto the prescribed quota as indicated in rule 13 and arrange all the persons selected from the two lists in a consolidated order of merit which will determine the seniority of persons on promotion to integrated grades ii and iii of the general grade ii direct recruits to a grade and persons substantively appointed to the grade from the select list for the grade shall be assigned seniority inter-se according to the quotas of substantive vacancies in the grade reserved for direct recruitment and the appointment of persons included in the select list, respectively 1964 rule have been enacted in exercise of power conferred by the proviso to art.
309 of the constitution and are thus indisputably statutory in character.
recruitment to integrated grade ii and iii of the general cadre is from two independent sources namely i direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination held by the union public service commission for this purpose from time to time and ii by the substantive appointment of persons included in the select list for integrated grade ii and iii of the general cadre.
the select list for the purpose of filling vacancies by substantive appointment has to be prepared from persons coming from two independent sources as required by rule 13 2 namely persons to be promoted on the basis of a limited competitive examination to be held by the commission for this purpose and promotion from grade iv for inclusion in the select list on the basis of seniority in grade iv of the general cadre and grade ii of cypher sub- cadre, who have rendered not less than 8 years of approved service in any grade or both the grades.
in short, recruitment to integrated grade ii and iii will be from three sources i 1/6th of the substantive vacancies to be filled in by direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination to be held by the union public service commission, ii 33 1/3 of the remaining 5/6th of the vacancies had to be filled in by bringing them on the select list on the basis of the results of a limited competitive examination and the remaining vacancies to be filled in by promotion on the basis of seniority from grad iv of general cadre or grade ii of cypher cadre who have rendered not less than 8 years of approved service.
there is thus recruitment to integrated grade ii and iii from three independent sources and a quota is fixed for recruitment from each source.
the quota as here in above set out was introduced by amending rule 13 as, per notification dated february 12 1975.
earlier the quota for direct recruits was 25 of the vacancies for a period of 5 years and then 33 1/3 of the vacancies.
the quota for the other two sources was 25 of the remaining vacancies on the result of limited competitive examination and the balance to be filled in by promotion according to seniority in the feeder grade.
thus the quota for direct recruits was raised from 25 to 33 1/3 and reduced to 1/6th of the vacancies i.e. 162.3.
the impugned seniority lists have been drawn up rotating vacancies for each source and if no recruitment is made from that source in a given year, the place in the list available to the source as per rotation is kept open and a later recruit at any distance of time from that source will be assigned that place over persons who are already recruited from other sources and would be working in substantive vacancies.
the net effect of a drawn-up seniority list in this manner is that a promotee in a given year even within its quota may go down to a much later direct recruit as the place in rotation is kept open for him without limitation of time.
this is the crux of the matter.
a birds eye-view of the relative position of the petitioners who are all departmental promotees in the two impugned seniority lists would bring into focus the contours of controversy.
-------------------------------------------------------- s.no. of the name of the place in the place in the petitioners petitioner 1979 senior- 1983 senior- ity list ity list --------------------------------------------------------- 1 2 3 4 --------------------------------------------------------- 1. g.s. lamba 397 163 2. s.k.chibber 380 147 3. kul bhushan 375 144 4.
i.s. ailawadi 398 164 5. k.d. avdhani 379 146 6. q l. khanijow 387 153 7. ranvir chawla - 244 8.
n.d. kharbanda 422 181 9.
v.n. sharma 483 222 10.
m. jayaraman 463 208 ------------------------------------------------------- it will be presently pointed out that the petitioners whose placements are indicated here and who have entered the service would be junior to those who enter later into service and would be placed at the vacant places in the list which are for purpose of clarity enumerated hereunder.
it will show that those who are yet to come would become senior to those in service and have entered service number of years ahead to them.
and one is not sure at what length of time the few entrants will enter service, the inequity, if it can be so called may be demonstrably pointed at this stage with reference to the seniority list of 1979.
placements in this list at sr.
numbers 294, 300, 305, 312, 318, 324, 330, 336, 342, 348, 354, 360, 366, 372, 378, 384, 390, 396, 402, 408, 414, 420, 426, 432, 438, 444, 456, 462, 468, 474, 480 and 486 have been kept open or vacant and are to be filled in at a later date by assigning seniority to direct recruits who would be recruited to the service for the first time after june 25, 1979 relevant to which seniority list was drawn up.
these later recruits at some unknown future date would score a march by nearly a hundred steps over the one at number 486 already in service by regular promotion.
simila