--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

order s.b. majmudar, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

i have heard learned counsel for the parties.
learned counsel for the contesting parties stated before me that the present case is a case of international commercial arbitration.
that was the view taken by justice punchhi as the hon.
chief justice then was and he had also taken the view on interpretation of section 11 9 of the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996 that the word may employed thereunder has the meaning of shall.
though there is no written order of justice punchhi, i was informed that orally it was so observed.
from the point of view of propriety i take this to be the decision on the point in this particular case and will proceed accordingly.
it was also agreed between learned counsel for the parties that if this view is taken as the present dispute concerns international commercial arbitration an arbitrator will have to be appointed whose nationality is other than the nationality of either parties, namely, neither indian nor american as the original plaintiff corporation in the suit which is the respondent before me is a company incorporated in america while the defendant company is incorporated in india.
hence, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, for appointment of arbitrator of their choice an arbitrator who has neither indian nor american nationality will have to be appointed.
efforts were made by honble the chief justice earlier for getting an arbitrator appointed by consent of parties.
they had also then agreed to the name of justice a.m. ahmadi, ex-chief justice of this court.
unfortunately, the learned arbitrator subsequently expressed his unwillingness to continue to act as arbitrator.
thereafter in spite of my best efforts, parties could not be persuaded to suggest the agreed name of another arbitrator, vice justice ahmadi.
under these circumstances, no other option is left for me but to appoint in invitum any other arbitrator who is neither indian nor american.
learned counsel for the respondent before me submitted that in that eventuality he would suggest the international chamber of commerce, paris which is a body corporate and which is dealing with such types of arbitration as such arbitrator, while on the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner the original defendant in the suit submitted that he has already consulted one dr nasim hasan shah, retired chief justice of pakistan and that his name was mentioned before honble mr justice punchhi and his lordship had suggested that the petitioner may obtain his consent to be arbitrator if appointed in these proceedings.
i am informed that dr shah has consented to act as an arbitrator on the remuneration of rs 10,000 per day in addition to his other out of pocket expenses which will include boarding and lodging charges.
they will be in addition to the aforesaid remuneration per day.
i am also informed that dr shah has agreed to hold sittings in delhi.
i may also put on record that earlier by consent of both the parties, justice a.m. ahmadi, retired chief justice of this court was suggested to be the arbitrator on the remuneration of rs 10,000 per day and on the same remuneration dr shah is agreeable to work as mentioned to me.
2. in my view, it will be too much expensive for parties to get their dispute arbitrated at paris.
i, therefore, reject this suggestion of learned counsel for the respondent.
under these circumstances, i allow this application and appoint dr nasim hasan shah, retired chief justice of pakistan, 58-d/1, gulberg iii, lahore, pakistan phone 755695 lahore to act as arbitrator as per the provisions of section 11 5 read with section 11 9 of the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996.
office shall intimate about the passing of this order to dr nasim hasan shah, who may get in touch with the parties for carrying out the arbitration proceedings pursuant to the present order, at his earliest convenience.