--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal number473 of 2007 mohmed amin amin choteli appellants rahim miyan shaikh anr.
versus c.b.i.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

through its director respondent with criminal appeal numbers484, 582 and 705 of 2007 judgment g.s. singhvi, j. these appeals by mohmed faruk frauk baba alla rakha shaikh, mohmed umar majid ahmed pathan mohmed fighter mohmed pahelwan mohmedkhan, sajidali denny mohmed ali saiyed, mohmed amin amin choteli rahim miyan shaikh, iqbal hussain laliyo dhobi kasambhai shaikh, salimkhan sikandarkhan pathan azamkhan pathan and gulam mohmed gulal kadarbhai shaikh hereinafter described as appellant numbers a-4, a-5, a-6, a-7, a-8, a-10 and a-11 respectively are directed against judgment dated 6.2.2007 of the designated judge tada , ahmedabad hereinafter referred to as trial court whereby they were acquitted of charges under section 3 and 5 of the terrorist and disruptive activities prevention act, 1987 for short the act but were held guilty of different offences under the indian penal code for short ipc and sentenced to life imprisonment.
appellant numbersa-5 and a-8 were also convicted under section 27 of the arms act, 1959 and sentenced to three years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of rs.3,000/- and in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of six months.
they were also convicted under section 135 of the bombay police act.
2. background facts i on 3.8.1992, hansraj trivedi, an alleged supplier of illicit liquor and eight others were gunned down at radhika gymkhana club, ahmedabad.
although the police registered criminal case number254 of 1992 in connection with that incident but effective steps were not taken to arrest abdul latif and his gang members, who were perceived as the culprits.
there was public outcry against the police inaction.
this compelled the concerned officers to intensify their efforts to arrest the accused.
in the wake of this development, abdul latif and members of his gang planned surreptitious surrender of some unimportant members of their party so that real culprits could go scot-free.
for this purpose, he sought help of a local politician shri hassankhan shamsherkhan pathan hassanlala.
the latter appears to have made efforts to facilitate surrender of some members of abdul latif gang but he could not succeed apparently because abdul rauf mohmed bhai rauf valiullah former member of rajya sabha and general secretary of gujarat pradesh congress i committee who came to know of this plan stoutly opposed the same and is said to have prepared a memorandum, which was to be submitted to the central government to expose criminal-political nexus in the state.
in order to prevent him from doing so, abdul latif and gang decided to eliminate rauf valiullah and to create terror among the people so that no one could come forward to oppose the plan of surreptitious surrender.
the task of finishing rauf valiullah was entrusted to rasoolkhan yakubkhan pathan rasool party and his gang.
some members of rasool party followed rauf valiullah from 6.10.1992 to 8.10.1992 but they could not target him.
on 9.10.1992, appellant numbersa-5, a-7, a-8 and a-11 were deputed to finish rauf valiullah.
they accomplished the task at around 2.30 p.m. when a-5 fired three shots with 38-bore revolver from close range at the deceased while he was entering maruti car parked outside madhuban building. ii pradeep bhai bakkabhai nautamlal dave pw-28 , who had accompanied the deceased to madhuban building and was present at the site, lodged f.i.r. exh.179 at ellisbridge police station.
thereupon, a case was registered under section 302 read with section 120b ipc, section 25 1 a and b of the arms act and sections 3 and 5 of the act. iii the investigation of the case was initially conducted by a police team headed by assistant commissioner of police, d division, ahmedabad, mr. makbulahmed mohd.
hanif anarwala, but in furtherance of notification dated 12.2.1993 and corrigendum dated 17.2.1993 issued by the government of india under section 5 of the delhi special police establishment act, 1946, with the consent of the government of gujarat, the case was entrusted to the central bureau of investigation cbi .
after completing investigation and obtaining sanction from commissioner of police, ahmedabad, the cbi filed charge-sheet under section 3 1 , 3 3 and 5 of the act, section 120b read with section 302 ipc, section 302 read with sections 34 ipc, section 302 read with section 114 ipc, section 302 ipc and section 27 of the arms act.
the case was committed to designated court and was numbered as tada case number176 of 1993.
subsequently, two more charge-sheets were submitted and the same were numbered as tada cases number 25 of 1996 and 32 of 1996.
all the cases were consolidated and were tried together. iv the charges were framed on 2.7.1998 against 11 accused.
all of them pleaded not guilty.
the prosecution examined 124 witnesses and produced 147 documents, which were duly exhibited.
thereafter, statements of the accused were recorded under section 313 of code of criminal procedure cr.p.c. .
they alleged that the police has foisted false cases against them to avoid embarrassment for having failed to solve the mystery surrounding the murder of rauf valiullah and that confessions were extracted from them by using coercion and threats.
3. after analyzing the evidence produced by the prosecution and considering the confessions made by the appellants except appellant numbera- 11, under section 15 of the act as also the statements made by them under section 313 cr.p.c., the trial court concluded that the prosecution has been able to establish the charges of conspiracy and murder and held javedkhan jaid azizkhan pathan, mohd.
taslim mohd umar shaikh, appellant numbersa-6, a-7, a-8 and a-10 guilty under section 120b and section 302 read with section 120b ipc.
appellant numbersa-4 and a-11 were held guilty of offence punishable under section 114 read with section 120b ipc and section 302 read with section 114 ipc.
appellant numbersa-5 and a-8 were held guilty under section 27 of the arms act and section 135 of the bombay police act.
abdul khurdush was acquitted of all the charges but was found guilty under section 176 ipc.
however, all the accused were acquitted of the charge under sections 3 and 5 of the act.
abdul khurdush was sentenced to one months imprisonment with a fine of rs.500/- and in default to undergo further simple imprisonment of one month.
appellant numbersa-4, a-5, a-6, a-7, a-8, a-10 and a-11 were sentenced to life imprisonment.
each of them was also directed to pay fine of rs.5000/- and in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year.
appellant numbersa-5 and a-8 were sentenced to 3 years imprisonment for offence under section 27 of arms act and in default to undergo 6 months simple imprisonment.
for offence under section 135 1 of bombay police act, appellant numbersa-5 and a-8 were awarded sentence of one month with fine of rs.500/- and in default to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one month.
arguments 4. learned counsel for the appellants argued that the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside because the findings recorded by the trial court on the charges of conspiracy and murder are not based on legally admissible evidence.
they emphasized that the prosecution did not produce any evidence to prove the ingredients of conspiracy i.e. an agreement or meeting of mind to commit the murder of rauf valiullah and argued that in the absence of such evidence the appellants could not have been convicted under section 302 read with section 120-b ipc.
learned counsel submitted that the language of confessions made by all the appellants is identical and this should have put the trial judge on guard and a deeper scrutiny was required to be made on the issue of voluntary character of the confessions, which the learned presiding officer failed to do and argued that the appellants could not have been convicted by relying on confessions ignoring that the same were not voluntary.
learned counsel extensively referred to the statements made by the appellants under section 313 cr.p.c.
to show that they were subjected to physical torture for the purpose of extracting confession and submitted that the same should have been rejected by the trial court because, i all the appellants were brought from ahmedabad to delhi within 24 hours of their arrest and they were compelled to make confessions without giving them adequate time to ponder over the consequences. ii the appellants were throughout kept in the custody of shri o.p. chatwal, deputy superintendent of police and investigating officer for short the investigating officer and were deprived of the legal assistance. iii the appellants were produced before shri a.k.
majumdar, pw- 104 and shri harbhajan ram, pw-103 both superintendent of police, cbi for the purpose of recording their confessions despite the fact that they were directly supervising the investigation and were in a position to dominate the will of the appellants. iv after preliminary questioning, the concerned superintendent of police handed over the appellants to the investigating officer, who again produced them for the purpose of making statement and confessions of the appellants were recorded under the dictates of the officers. v shri a.k.
majumdar and shri harbhajan ram did not follow the guidelines laid down by this court in kartar singh vs. state of punjab 1994 3 scc 569, except in the case of appellant numbera- 10, inasmuch as they were not produced before chief judicial magistrate, delhi. vi copies of the confessional statements were supplied to the investigating officer even before the same were dispatched to the concerned court. viii the appellants had retracted their confessions on the first available opportunity.
5. ms. kamini jaiswal, learned counsel for appellant numbersa-7, a-8 and a-11 placed reliance on the judgment of this court in state through superintendent of police, cbi sit vs. nalini and others 1999 5 scc 253 and argued that the trial court committed serious error by convicting the appellants without requiring the prosecution to produce some evidence to corroborate the confessions.
she laid considerable emphasis on the alleged failure of prosecution to explain as to why the appellants were taken from ahmedabad to delhi in the guise of conducting polygraphic test when the facility for that test is available at ahmedabad and cbi officers of the rank of superintendent of police are also stationed at ahmedabad and argued that the confessions made by the appellants except appellant numbera- 11 ought to have been discarded only on this ground notwithstanding the fact that the prosecution had made an endeavour to show compliance of section 15 of the act and rule 15 of the tada rules, 1987 for short the rules .
she invited the courts attention to the averments contained in crl.
misc.
number2160 of 1994 filed before the high court on behalf of abdul khurdush, abdul ghani khan sheikh and appellant numbersa-1, a-4, a-7 and a-8, which was dismissed on 6.2.1995 and slp crl. number1582 of 1995 to show that her clients had retracted the confessions at the first available opportunity, reiterated the same in the statements made under section 313 cr.p.c.
and argued that such type of confessions could not be made basis for convicting them on the charge of murder.
6. shri vimal chandra s. dave, counsel appearing for appellant numbersa- 4 and a-10 argued that the confessions of the appellants are liable to be rejected because both shri a.k. majumdar and shri harbhajan ram, superintendents of police, cbi, who were actively supervising the investigation, had successfully tutored the minds of the appellants and induced them to make confessions.
shri dave submitted that all the accused were kept in the custody of the investigating officer for 10 days before their confessions were recorded but this aspect has been ignored by the trial court while deciding the issue of voluntary character of the confessions.
shri dave pointed out that appellant numbera-10 retracted his confession on 25.7.1996 itself when he was produced before chief judicial magistrate, delhi and argued that the trial court committed serious illegality by relying upon the retracted confession.
dr. sushil gupta argued that there is no evidence to link accused with the conspiracy allegedly hatched by rasool party and the learned trial judge committed serious error by convicting them.
in support of their arguments learned counsel relied upon the judgments of this court in raja khima vs. state of saurashtra air 1956 sc 217, sarwan singh rattan singh vs. state of punjab air 1957 sc 637, shankaria vs. state of rajasthan 1978 3 scc 435, aloke nath dutta vs. state of west bengal 2006 13 scale 467 and state of rajasthan vs. ajit singh 2007 12 scale 451.
7. shri amarjit sharan, learned additional solicitor general relied upon section 15 1 of the act as amended in 1993 and the judgments of this court in gurdeep singh vs. state delhi admn. 2000 1 scc 498 , lal singh vs. state of gujarat 2001 3 scc 221, jayawant dattatray suryarao vs. state of maharashtra 2001 10 scc 109, devender pal singh vs. state of nct of delhi 2002 5 scc 234, jameel ahmad vs. state of rajasthan 2003 9 scc 673 and abdulvahab abdul majid shaikh vs. state of gujarat 2007 9 scc 293 and argued that the confessions made under the act is a substantive piece of evidence and can be used not only against the maker but also against co-accused, abettor or conspirator.
he submitted that the trial court did not commit any illegality by relying upon the confessions of the appellants because the same were recorded strictly in accordance with the procedure laid down in rule 15 of the rules.
on the issue of voluntary character of confessions of the appellants, the learned additional solicitor general argued that recording thereof at delhi under the supervision of shri a.k.
majumdar and shri harbhajan ram cannot lead to an inference that the same were not voluntary.
shri sharan laid considerable emphasis on the fact that by virtue of order passed under section 268 cr.p.c., the court had given custody of the appellants to the investigating officer and argued that he alone could have produced them before the concerned superintendent of police for the purpose of recording confession.
shri sharan submitted that handing over of the accused to the investigating officer after recording of preliminary statement under rule 15 1 , cannot be dubbed as illegal because in terms of the order passed by the competent court, investigating officer was duty bound to keep the custody of the accused.
learned additional solicitor general then submitted that the statements contained in discharge application filed before the trial court and the slp filed before this court are per se contradictory and same cannot be relied upon for declaring the confessions to be non-voluntary.
shri sharan then referred to the judgment of the constitution bench in prakash kumar vs. state of gujarat 2005 2 scc 409 and argued that the conviction of the appellants under section 302 read with section 120b ipc cannot be faulted on the ground that they were acquitted of the charge under the act.
in the end, he argued that para 2 of the guidelines laid down by this court in kartar singhs case which requires that the person who makes confession under section 15 1 of the act should be produced before the chief metropolitan magistrate or chief judicial magistrate to whom the confession is required to be sent under rule 15 5 of the rules along with original statement of confession, is not attracted in the present case because confessions of the appellants except appellant numbera-10 were recorded prior to 11.3.1994 i.e. the date of judgment and insofar as appellant numbera-10 is concerned, he was produced before the chief judicial magistrate, delhi on the date his confession was recorded i.e. 25.7.1996.
8.
we have given serious thought to the entire matter.
section 15 of the act, as amended by act number43 of 1993 and rule 15 of the rules which have bearing on these cases read as under- section 15 of the act certain confessions made to police officers to be taken into consideration- 1 notwithstanding anything in the code or in the indian evidence act, 1872 1 of 1872 , but subject to the provisions of this section, a confession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than a superintendent of police and recorded by such police officer in writing or on any mechanical device like cassettes, tapes or sound tracks from out of which sounds or images can be reproduced, shall be admissible in the trial of such person or co-accused, abettor or conspirator for an offence under this act or rules made thereunder provided that co-accused, abettor or conspirator is charged and tried in the same case together with the accused. 2 the police officer shall, before recording any confession under sub-section 1 , explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him and such police officer shall not record any such confession unless upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily.
rule 15 of the rules recording of confession made to police officers.- a confession made by a persons before a police officer and recorded by such police officer under section 15 of the act shall invariably be recorded in the language in which such confession is made and if that is not practicable, in the language used by such police officer for official purposes or in the language of the designated court and it shall form part of the record. 2 the confession so recorded shall be shown, read or played back to the person concerned and if he does not understand the language in which it is recorded, it shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands and he shall be at liberty to explain or add to his confession. 3 the confession shall, if it is in writing, be- a signed by the person who makes the confession and b by the police officer who shall certify under his own hand that such confession was taken in his presence and recorded by him and that the record contains a full and true account of the confession made by the person and such police officer shall make a memorandum at the end of the confession to the following effect i have explained to name that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and i believe that this confession was voluntarily made.
it was taken in my presence and hearing and recorded by me and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.
sd - police officer 4 where the confession is recorded on any mechanical device , the memorandum referred to in sub-rule 3 in so far as it is applicable and a declaration made by the person making the confession that the said confession recorded on the mechanical device has been correctly recorded in his presence shall also be recorded in the mechanical device at the end of the confession. 5 every confession recorded under the said section 15 shall be sent forthwith to the chief metropolitan magistrate or the chief judicial magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in which such confession has been recorded and such magistrate shall forward the recorded confession so received to the designated court which may take cognizance of the offence.
9. the challenge to constitutional validity of the act was rejected in kartar singhs case.
while doing so, the court took note of the apprehension expressed by some of the learned counsel that the provisions of the act are likely to be misused for coercing the accused to make confession and laid down the following guidelines- 1 the confession should be recorded in a free atmosphere in the same language in which the person is examined and as narrated by him 2 the person from whom a confession has been recorded under section 15 1 of the act, should be produced before the chief metropolitan magistrate or the chief judicial magistrate to whom the confession is required to be sent under rule 15 5 along with the original statement of confession, written or recorded on mechanical device without unreasonable delay 3 the chief metropolitan magistrate or the chief judicial magistrate should scrupulously record the statement, if any, made by the accused so produced and get his signature and in case of any complaint of torture, the person should be directed to be produced for medical examination before a medical officer not lower in rank than of an assistant civil surgeon 4 notwithstanding anything contained in the code of criminal procedure, 1973, no police officer below the rank of an assistant commissioner of police in the metropolitan cities and elsewhere of a deputy superintendent of police or a police officer of equivalent rank, should investigate any offence punishable under this act of 1987.
this is necessary in view of the drastic provisions of this act.
more so when the prevention of corruption act, 1988 under section 17 and the immoral traffic prevention act, 1956 under section 13, authorise only a police officer of a specified rank to investigate the offences under those specified acts. 5 the police officer if he is seeking the custody of any person for pre-indictment or pre-trial interrogation from the judicial custody, must file an affidavit sworn by him explaining the reason not only for such custody but also for the delay, if any, in seeking the police custody 6 in case, the person, taken for interrogation, on receipt of the statutory warning that he is not bound to make a confession and that if he does so, the said statement may be used against him as evidence, asserts his right to silence, the police officer must respect his right of assertion without making any compulsion to give a statement of disclosure.
10.
although the constitution bench observed that the central government may take note of the guidelines and incorporate them by appropriate amendments in the act and the rules, necessary amendments have not been carried out so far.
11.
the question whether a confession recorded under section 15 of the act can be used for convicting an accused for an offence under other enactments like ipc despite his acquittal of the charge framed under the act, was considered and answered in negative by a two-judges bench in bilal ahmad kaloo vs. state of a.p. 1997 7 scc 431.
the same view was reiterated in rambhai nathabhai gadhvi vs. state of gujarat 1997 7 scc 744 and gurprit singh vs. state of punjab 2002 10 scc 201.
however, in nalinis case, a three-judges bench held that if a person is tried simultaneously for offences under the act along with other enactments his acquittal in respect of an offence under the act is not sufficient to discard the confession recorded under section 15 of the act and the same can be used for conviction under other enactments.
the three-judges bench referred to the earlier judgments in bilal ahmads case supra , rambhai nathabhai gadhvis case supra , gurprit singhs case supra and observed section 12 of tada enables the designated court to jointly try, at the same trial, any offence under tada together with any other offence with which the accused may be charged as per the code of criminal procedure.
sub-section 2 thereof empowers the designated court to convict the accused, in such a trial, of any offence under any other law if it is found by such designated court in such trial that the accused is found guilty of such offence.
if the accused is acquitted of the offences under tada in such a trial, but convicted of the offence under any other law, it does not mean that there was only a trial for such other offence under any other law.
section 15 of tada enables the confessional statement of an accused made to a police officer specified therein to become admissible in the trial of such a person.
it means, if there was a trial of any offence under tada together with any other offence under any other law, the admissibility of the confessional statement would continue to hold good even if the accused is acquitted under tada offences.
12.
the correctness of the above extracted portion of the nalinis judgment was doubted by a two-judges bench in prakash kumars case supra .
when the matter was placed before a three-judges bench, the same was referred to five-judges bench.
the larger bench rejected the argument of the appellants counsel that the words for an offence under this act employed in section 15 makes the confession admissible only for an offence under the act and not for other offences and approved the ratio of nalinis case on the issue of use of confession recorded under section 15 for convicting an accused under other enactments.
for the sake of clarity, paragraphs 33, 35 and 36 of the judgment of the larger bench are extracted below- 33.
a conjoint reading of the two sections as a whole leaves no manner of doubt that one provision is to be construed with reference to the other provision and vice versa so as to make the provision consistent with the object sought to be achieved.
the scheme and object of the act being the admissibility of the confession recorded under section 15 of the act in the trial of a person or co-accused, abettor or conspirator charged and tried in the same case together with the accused, as provided under section 12 of the act.
35. section 12 1 as quoted above authorises the designated court to try offences under tada along with another offence with which the accused may be charged under crpc at the same trial.
the only embargo imposed on the exercise of the power is that the offence under tada is connected with any other offence being tried together.
further, section 12 2 provides that the designated court may convict the accused person of offence under that act or any rule made thereunder or under any other law and pass any sentence authorised under that act or the rules or under any other law, as the case may be for the punishment thereof, if in the course of any trial under tada the accused persons are found to have committed any offence either under that act or any rule or under any other law.
36.
the legislative intendment underlying sections 12 1 and 2 is clearly discernible, to empower the designated court to try and convict the accused for offences committed under any other law along with offences committed under the act, if the offence is connected with such other offence.
the language if the offence is connected with such other offence employed in section 12 1 of the act has great significance.
the necessary corollary is that once the other offence is connected with the offence under tada and if the accused is charged under the code and tried together in the same trial, the designated court is empowered to convict the accused for the offence under any other law, notwithstanding the fact that no offence under tada is made out.
this could be the only intendment of the legislature.
to hold otherwise, would amount to rewrite or recast legislation and read something into it which is not there.
13.
in view of the last mentioned judgment of the larger bench, it must be treated as settled law that even if a person is acquitted of the charge under the act, a confession recorded under section 15 can be used for convicting him for an offence under other enactments including ipc.
14.
at this stage, we may notice some judgments in which law relating to confessions has been generally discussed.
15. in pakala narayana swami vs. emperor air 1939 pc 47 lord atkin elucidated the meaning and purport of the expression confession in the following words confession must either admit in terms the offence, or at any rate substantially all the facts which constitute the offence.
an admission of a gravely incriminating fact, even a conclusively incriminating fact is not of itself a confession 16.
in bhuboni sahu vs. the king air 36 1949 pc 257, the privy council interpreted section 30 of the indian evidence act, 1872 for short, the 1872 act and held 9.
this section was introduced for the first time in the evidence act of 1872, and marks a departure from the common law of england.
it will be noticed that the section applies to confessions, and not to statements which do not admit the guilt of the confessing party.
in the present case the courts in india appreciated this, and ruled out statements made by certain of the accused which were self-exculpatory in character.
the statement of trinath was, however, a confession.
section 30 seems to be based on the view that an admission by an accused person of his own guilt affords some sort of sanction in support of the truth of his confession against others as well as himself.
but a confession of a co-accused is obviously evidence of a very weak type.
it does not indeed come within the definition of evidence contained in s.3 evidence act.
it is not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the accused, and it cannot be tested by cross- examination.
it is a much weaker type of evidence than the evidence of an approver which is not subject to any of those infirmities.
section 30, however, provides that the court may take the confession into consideration and thereby, no doubt, makes it evidence on which the court may act but the section does not say that the confession is to amount to proof.
clearly there must be other evidence.
the confession is only one element in the consideration of all the facts proved in the case it can be put into the scale and weighed with the other evidence.
their lordships think that the view which has prevailed in most of the high courts in india, namely that the confession of a co-accused can be used only in support of other evidence and cannot be made the foundation of a conviction, is correct. emphasis supplied 17.
the same view was reiterated in raja khimas case, and it was held that confession made by a person accused of an offence can be relied upon for convicting him only if the court is satisfied that the same was made voluntarily.
applying this principle in bharat vs. state of u.p. 1971 3 scc 950, the court observed that the voluntary nature of the confession depends upon whether there was any threat, inducement or promise and its truth is judged in the context of the entire prosecution case and that the confession must fit into the proved facts and not run counter to them.
the court held that when the voluntary character of the confession and its truth are accepted it is safe to rely on it.
indeed a confession, if it is voluntary and true and not made under any inducement or threat or promise, is the most patent piece of evidence against the maker.
the court also dealt with the issue of retracted confession and held that a court may take into account the retracted confession, but it must look for the reasons for the making of the confession as well as for its retraction, and must weigh the two to determine whether the retraction affects the voluntary nature of the confession or not.
if the court is satisfied that it was retracted because of an after thought or advice, the retraction may not weigh with the court if the general facts proved in the case and the tenor of the confession as made and the circumstances of its making and withdrawal warrant its user. therefore, it can be stated that a true confession made voluntarily may be acted upon with slight evidence to corroborate it, but a retracted confession requires the general assurance that the retraction was an after thought and that the earlier statement was true.
18.
the legal position on retracted confession was clarified in pyare lal bhargava vs. state of rajasthan air 1963 sc 1094 in the following words a retracted confession may form the legal basis of a conviction if the court is satisfied that it was true and was voluntarily made.
but it has been held that a court shall not base a conviction on such a confession without corroboration.
it is not a rule of law, but is only rule of prudence.
it cannot even be laid down as an inflexible rule of practice or prudence that under no circumstances can such a conviction be made without corroboration, for a court may, in a particular case, be convinced of the absolute truth of a confession and prepared to act upon it without corroboration but it may be laid down as a general rule of practice that it is unsafe to rely upon a confession, much less on a retracted confession, unless the cou