--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

case number writ petition civil 79 of 1959 petitioner smt ujjam bai respondent state of u.p. date of judgment 10/04/1962
bench s.k. das j. l. kapur a.k. sarkar k. subba rao m. hidayatullah n.r. ayyangar j.r. mudholkar judgment judgment 1963
1 scr 778

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

the following judgments were delivered s. k. das, j. - the facts of the case have been stated in the judgment of my learned brother kapur j., and it is not necessary for me to restate them.
i have reached the same conclusion as has been reached by my learned brother.
but in view of the importance of the question raised, i would like to state in my own words the reasons for reaching that conclusion.
the two questions which have been referred to this larger bench are 1. is an order of assessment made by an authority under a taxing statute which is intra vires, open to challenge as repugnant to article 19 1 g , on the sole ground that it is based on a misconstruction of a provision of the act or of a notification issued there under ?
2. can the validity of such an order be questioned in a petition under article 32 of the constitution ?
these two questions are inter-connected and substantially relate to one matter is the validity of an order made with jurisdiction under an act which in intra vires and good law in all respects, or of a notification properly issued thereunder, liable to be questioned in a petition under article 32 of the constitution on the sole ground that the provisions of the act, or the terms of the notification issued thereunder, have been misconstrued ?
it is necessary, perhaps, to start with the very article, namely, article 32, with reference to which the question has to be answered.
32. 1 the right to move the supreme court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this part is guaranteed. 2 the supreme court shall have power to issue directions or orders, or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this part. 3 without prejudice to the powers conferred on the supreme court by clauses 1 and 2 , parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the supreme court under clause 2 . 4 the right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by this constitution.
the article occurs in part iii of the constitution headed fundamental rights.
it is one of a series of articles which fall under the sub-head, right to constitutional remedies.
there can be no doubt that the right to move the supreme court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the right conferred by part iii is itself a guaranteed fundamental right.
indeed, clause 1 of the article says so in express terms.
clause 2 says that this court shall have power to issue directions or order or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by part iii. clause 4 makes it clear that the right guaranteed by the article shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by the constitution.
article 359 of the constitution states that where a proclamation of emergency is in operation the president may by order declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of the rights conferred by part iii as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain suspended etc.
it is clear, therefore, that so long as no order is made by the president to suspend the enforcement of the rights conferred by part iii of the constitution every person in india, citizen or otherwise, has the guaranteed right to move the supreme court for enforcement of the rights conferred on him by part iii of the constitution and the supreme court has the power to issue necessary directions, orders or writs which may be appropriate for the enforcement of such rights.
indeed, this court has held in more than one decision that under the constitution it is the privilege and duty of this court to uphold the fundamental rights, whenever a person seeks the enforcement of such rights.
the oath of office which a judge of the supreme court takes on assumption of office contains inter alia a solemn affirmation that he will uphold the constitution and the laws.the controversy before us centres round the expression enforcement of the rights conferred by this part which occurs in clauses 1 and 2 of the article.
it has not been disputed before us that this court is not trammelled by technical considerations relation to the issue of writs habeas corpus mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari.
this court said in t. c. basappa v. t. nagappa 1955 1 scr 230, 256. .
in view of the express provisions in our constitution we need not now look back to the early history or the procedural technicalities of these writs in english law, nor feel oppressed by any difference or change of opinion expressed in particular case by english judges.
we can make an order or issue a writ in the nature of certiorari in all appropriate case and in appropriate manner, so long as we keep to the broad and fundamental principles that regulate the exercise of jurisdiction in the matter of granting such writs in english law.
therefore, apart altogether from all technical considerations, the broad question before us is - in what circumstances does the question of enforcement of the rights conferred by part iii of the constitution arise under article 32 of the constitution, remembering all the time that the constitutional remedy under article 32 is itself a fundamental right ?
on behalf of the petitioner it has been submitted that whenever it is prima facie established that there is violation of a fundamental right, the question of its enforcement arises for example, a it may arise when the statute itself is ultra vires and some action is taken under such a statute, or b it may also arise when some action is taken under an intra vires statute, but the action taken is without jurisdiction so that the statute though intra vires does not support it to c it may again arise on misconstruction of statute which is intra vires, but the misconstruction is such that the action taken on the misconstrued statute results in the violation of fundamental right.
it has been argued before us that administrative bodies do not cease to come within the definition of the word state in article 12 of the constitution when they perform quasi- judicial functions and in view of the true scope of article 32, the action of such bodies whenever such action violates or threatens to violate a fundamental right gives rise to the question of enforcement of such right and no distinction can be drawn in respect of three classes of cases referred to above.
as to the case before us the argument is that the taxing authorities misconstrued the terms of the notification which was issued by the state government on december 14, 1957 under section 4 1 b of the united provinces sales tax act, u.p. act number xv of 1948 and as a result of the misconstruction, they have assessed the petitioner to sales tax on the sum of rs. 4, 71, 541.75 np. which action, it is submitted, has violated the fundamental right guaranteed to the petitioner under article 19 1 f and g and article 31 of the constitution.the misconstruction, it is argued, may lead to a transgression of constitutional limits in different ways for example, in a case where an inter-state transaction of sale is sought to be taxed despite the constitutional prohibition in article 286 of the constitution as it stood previously, by wrongly holding that the transaction in intra-state, there is a transgression of constitutional limits.
similarly, where a quasi-judicial authority commits an error as to a fact or issue which the authority has complete jurisdiction to decide under the statute, but the error is of such a nature that it affects a fundamental right, there is again a transgression of constitutional limits.
the argument is that there is no distinction in principle between these classes of misconstruction of a statute, and the real test, it is submitted, should be the individuality of the error, namely, whether the error impings on a fundamental right.
if it does, then the person aggrieved has a right to approach this court by means of a petition under article 32 of the constitution.
on the contrary, the contention of the respondents which is urged as a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the petition in that on the facts stated in the present petition no question of the enforcement of any fundamental right arises and the petition is not maintainable.
it is stated that the validity of the act not being challenged in any manner, every part of it is good law therefore, the provision in the act authorising the sales-tax officer as a quasi-judicial tribunal to assess the tax is a valid provision and a decision made by the said tribunal strictly acting in exercise of the quasi-judicial power given to it must necessarily be a fully valid and legal act.
it is pointed out that there is no question here of the misconstruction leading to a transgression of constitutional limits nor to any error relating to a collateral fact.
the error which is complained of, assuming it to be an error, is in respect of a matter which the assessing authority has complete jurisdiction to decide that decision is legally valid irrespective of whether it is correct or otherwise.
it is stated that a legally valid act cannot offend any fundamental right and the proper remedy for correcting an error of the nature complained of in the present case is by means of an appeal or if the error is an error apparent on the face of the record, by means of a petition under article 226 of the constitution.before i proceed to consider these arguments it is necessary to clear the ground by standing that certain larger questions were also mooted before us, but i consider it unnecessary to examine or decide them.
such questions were 1 whether taxation laws are subject to the limitations imposed by part iii, particularly article 19 therein, 2 whether the expression the state in article 12 includes courts also, and 3 whether there can be any question of the enforcement of fundamental rights against decisions of courts or the action of private persons.
these larger questions do not fall for decision in the present case and i do not consider it proper to examine or decide them here.
i should make it clear that nothing i have stated in the present judgment should be taken as expressing any opinion on these larger questions.
it is perhaps necessary to add also that this writ petition could have been disposed of on the very short ground that there was no misconstruction of the notification dated december 14, 1957 and the resultant action of the assessing authority did not affect any fundamental right of the petitioner.
that is the view which we have expressed in the connected appeal of m s. chhotabhai jethabhai patel company v. the sales tax officer, agra and another civil appeal number 99 of 1961 in which judgment is also being delivered to-day.
the writ petition, however, has been referred to a larger bench for the decision of the two important constitutional questions relating to the scope of article 32, which i have stated earlier in this judgment.
it is, therefore, necessary and proper that i should decide those two questions which undoubtedly arise as a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition.
i now proceed to a consideration of the main arguments advanced before us.
on some of the aspects of the problem which has been debated before us there has been very little disagreement.
i may first delimit the filed where there has been agreement between the parties and then go on to the controversial area of disagreement.
it has not been disputed before us that where the statute or a provision thereof is ultra vires, any action taken under such ultra vires provision by a quasi-judicial authority which violates or threatens to violate a fundamental right does give rise to a question of enforcement of that right and a petition under article 32 of the constitution will lie.
there are several decisions of this court which have laid this down.
it is unnecessary to cite them all and a reference need only be made to one of the earliest decision on this aspect of the case, namely, himmatlal harilal mehta v. the state of madhya pradesh 1954 scr 1122. .
a similar but not exactly the same position arose in the bengal immunity company limited v. the state of bihar 1955 2 scr 603, 619, 620. .
the facts of the case were that the appellant company filed a petition under article 226 in the high court of patna for a writ of prohibition restraining the sales tax officer from making an assessment of sales tax pursuant to a notice issued by him.
the appellant claimed that the sales sought to be assessed were made in the course of inter-state trade, that the provisions of the bihar sales tax act, 1947 bihar act 19 of 1947 which authorised the imposition of tax on such sales were repugnant to article 286 2 and void, and that, therefore, the proceedings taken by the sales tax officer should be quashed.
the application was dismissed by the high court on the ground that if the sales tax officer made an assessment which was erroneous, the assessee could challenge it by way of appeal or revision under sections 24 and 25 of that act, and that as the matter was within the jurisdiction of the sales tax officer, no writ of prohibition or certiorari could be issued.
there was an appeal against this order to this court and therein a preliminary objection was taken that a writ under article 226 was not the appropriate remedy open to an assessee for challenging the legality of the proceedings before a sales tax officer.
in rejecting the contention, this court observed it is, however, clear from article 265 that no tax can be levied or collected except by authority of law which must mean a good and valid law.
the contention of the appellant company is that the act which authorises the assessment, levying and collection of sales tax on inter-state trade contravenes and constitutes an infringement of article 286 and is, therefore, ultra vires, void and unenforceable.
if, however, this contention by well founded, the remedy by way of a writ must, on principle and authority, be available to the party aggrieved.
and dealing with the contention that the petitioner should proceed by way of appeal or revision under the act, this court observed the answer to this plea is short and simple.
the remedy under the act cannot be said to be adequate and is, indeed, nugatory or useless if the act which provides for such remedy is itself ultra vires and void and the principle relied upon can, therefore, have no application where a party comes to court with an allegation that his right has been or is being threatened to be infringed by a law which is ultra vires the powers of the legislature which enacted it and as such void and prays for appropriate relief under article 226.
it will be seen that the question which arose in that case was with reference to a provision in the taxing statute which was ultra vires and the decision was that any action taken under such a provision was without the authority of law and was, therefore, an unconstitutional interference with the right to carry on business under article 19 1 f .
in circumstances somewhat similar in nature there have been other decision of this court which the violation of a fundamental right was taken to have been established when the assessing authority sought to tax a transaction the taxation of which came within a constitutional prohibition.
such cases were treated as on a par with those cases where the provision itself was ultra vires.the decision in bidi supply company v. the union of india 1956 2 scr 67. arose out of a somewhat different set of facts.
there the central board of revenue transferred by means of a general order certain cases of the petitioner under section 5 7-a of the india income-tax officer, district iii, calcutta, to the income-tax officer, special circle, ranchi.
it was held that an omnibus wholesale order of transfer as was made in the case was not contemplated by the sub-section and, therefore, the impugned order of transfer which was expressed in general terms without reference to any particular case and without any limitation as to time was beyond the competence of the central board of revenue.
it was also held that the impugned order was discriminatory against the petitioner and violated the fundamental right guaranteed by article 14 of the constitution.
this decision really proceeded upon the basis that an executive body cannot, without authority of law, take action violative of a fundamental right and if it does, an application under article 32 will lie.
in that case no question arose of the exercise of a quasi-judicial function in the discharge of undoubted jurisdiction on the contrary, the ratio of the decision was that the order passed by the central board of revenue was without jurisdiction.
the decision was considered again in pannalal binjraj v. union of india 1957 scr 233. after further amendments had been made in section 5 7-a of the india income-tax act, 1922 and it was pointed out that section 5 7-a as amended was a measure of administrative convenience and constitutionally valid and an order passed thereunder could not be challenged as unconstitutional.
there are other decisions which proceeded on a similar basis, namely that if a quasi-judicial authority acts without jurisdiction or wrongly assumes jurisdiction by committing an error as to a collateral fact and the resultant action threatens or violates a fundamental right, the question of enforcement of that right arises and a petition under article 32 will lie. see tata iron and steel company limited v. s. r. sarkar 1961 1 scr 379, 383. and madan lal arora v. the excise and taxation officer, amritsar 1962 1 scr 823. .
in tata iron and steel company limited v. s. r. sarkar 1955 2 scr 603, 619, 620. and the state of bombay v. united motor india limited 1953 scr 1969. and observed in these cases, in appeals from orders passed by the high courts in petitions under article 226, this court held that an attempt to levy tax under a statute which was ultra vires infringed the fundamental right of the citizens and recourse to the high court for protection of the fundamental right was not prohibited because of the provisions contained in article 265.
in the case before us, the vires of the central sales tax act, 1956, are not challenged but in kailash nath v. the state of uttar pradesh 1957 air sc 790. a petition challenging the levy of a tax was entertained by this court even though the act under the authority of which the tax was sought to be recovered was not challenged as ultra vires.
it is not necessary for purposes of this case to decide whether the principle of kailash naths case the learned judge then proceeded to hold that as there was under the act a single liability and that had been discharged, there could be no proceedings for the assessment of the same sales a second time to tax.
the ration of the decision would appear to be that as the law did not authorise the imposition of tax a second time on sales on which tax had been levied and collected, proceedings for assessment a second time were without jurisdiction.
in madan lal aroras case 1962 1 scr 823. a notice for assessment was issued after the expiry of the period prescribed therefore by the statute.
the assessee thereupon applied to this court under article 32 for quashing the proceedings for assessment on the ground that they were without jurisdiction and it was held that as the taxing authority had not power under the statute to issue the notice in question the proceedings were without jurisdiction and must be quashed.
this again was a case in which the authority had no jurisdiction under the act to take proceedings for assessment of tax and it made no difference that such assumption for jurisdiction was based on a misconstruction of statutory provision.it is necessary perhaps to refer here to another class of cases which have sometimes been characterised as cases of procedural ultra vires.
when a statute prescribes a manner or form in which a duty is to be performed or a power exercised, it seldom lays down what will be the legal consequences of failure to observe its prescription.
the courts must, therefore, formulate their own criteria for determining whether the procedural rules are to be regarded as mandatory in which case disobedience will render void or voidable what has been done, or as directory in which case disobedience will be treated as a mere irregularity not affecting the validity of what has been done.
a quasi-judicial authority is under an obligation to act judicially.
suppose, it does not so act and passes an order in violation of the principles of natural justice.
what is the position then ?
there are some decisions, particularly with regard to customs authorities, where it has been held that an order of a quasi-judicial authority given in violation of the principles of natural justice is really an order without jurisdiction and if the order threatens or violates a fundamental right, an application under article 32 may lie. see sinha govindji v. the deputy controller of imports exports, madras 1962 1 scr 540. .
these decisions stand in a class by themselves and really proceed on the footing that the order passed was procedurally ultra vires and therefore without jurisdiction.
so far i have dealt with three main classes of cases as to which there is very little disagreement 1 where action is taken under an ultra vires statute 2 where the statute is intra vires, but the action taken is without jurisdiction and 3 where the action taken is procedurally ultra vires.
in all these cases the question of enforcement of a fundamental right may arise and if it does arise, an application under article 32 will undoubtedly lie.
as to these three classes of cases there has been very little disagreement between the parties before us.now, i come to the controversial area.
what is the position with regard to an order made by a quasi-judicial authority in the undoubted exercise of its jurisdiction in pursuance of a provision of law which is admittedly intra vires ?
it is necessary first to clarify the concept of jurisdiction.
jurisdiction means authority to decide.
whenever a judicial or quasi-judicial tribunal is empowered or required to enquire into a question of law or fact for the purpose of giving a decision on it, its findings thereon cannot be impeached collaterally or on an application for certiorari but are binding until reversed on appeal.
where a quasi-judicial authority has jurisdiction to decide a matter, it does not lose its jurisdiction by coming to a wrong conclusion whether it is wrong in law or in fact.
the question, whether a tribunal has jurisdiction depends not on the truth or falsehood of the facts into which it has to enquire, or upon the correctness of its findings on these facts, but upon their nature, and it is determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion, of the inquiry. rex v. bolten 1841 i q.b. 66, 74. .
thus, a tribunal empowered to determine claims for compensation for loss of office has jurisdiction to determine all questions of law and fact relating to the measure of compensation and the tenure of the office, and it does not exceed its jurisdiction by determine any of those questions incorrectly but it has no jurisdiction to entertain a claim for reinstatement or damages for wrongful dismissal, and it will exceed its jurisdiction if it makes an order in such terms, for it has no legal power to give any decision whatsoever on those matters.
a tribunal may lack jurisdiction if it is improperly constituted, or if it fails to observe certain essential preliminaries to the inquiry.
but it does not exceed its jurisdiction by basing its decision upon an incorrect determination of any question that it is empowered or required i.e., had jurisdiction to determine.
the strength of this theory of jurisdiction lies in its logical consistency.
but there are other cases where parliament when it empowers an inferior tribunal to enquire into certain facts intend to demarcate two areas of enquiry, the tribunals findings within one area being conclusive and with in the other area impeachable.
the jurisdiction of an inferior tribunal may depend upon the fulfilment of some condition precedent or upon the existence of some particular fact.
such a fact is collateral to the actual matter which the tribunal has to try and the determination whether it exists or not is logically prior to the determination of the actual question which the tribunal has to try.
the tribunal must itself decide as to the collateral fact when, at the inception of an inquiry by a tribunal of limited jurisdiction, a challenge is made to its jurisdiction, the tribunal has to make up its mind whether it will act or not, and for that purpose to arrive at some decision on whether it has jurisdiction or not.
there may be tribunals which, by virtue of legislation constitution them, have the power to determine finally the preliminary facts on which the further exercise of their jurisdiction depends but, subject to that an inferior tribunal cannot, by a wrong decision with regard to a collateral fact, give itself a jurisdiction which it would not otherwise possess. halsburys laws of england, 3rd edn.
vol.
11 page 59 .
the characteristic attribute of judicial act or decision is that it binds, whether it be right or wrong.
an error of law or fact committed by a judicial or quasi-judicial body cannot, in general, be impeached otherwise than on appeal unless the erroneous determination relates to a matter on which the jurisdiction of that body depends.
these principles govern not only the findings of inferior courts stricto sensu but also the findings of administrative bodies which are held to be acting in a judicial capacity.
such bodies are deemed to have been invested with power to err within the limits of their jurisdiction and provided that they keep within those limits, their decisions must be accepted as valid unless set aside on appeal.
even the doctrine of res judicata has been applied to such decisions. see livingstone v. westminister corporation 1904 2 k.b. 109. re birkenhead corporation 1952 ch. 359. re 56 denton road twickenham 1953 ch. 51. society of medical officers of health v. hope 1959 2 w.l.r.
377 , 391, 396, 397, 402. .
in burn company, calcutta v. their employees 1956 scr 781. this court said that although the rule of res judicata as enacted by section 11 of the code of civil procedure did not in terms apply to an award made by an industrial tribunal its underlying principle which is founded on sound public policy and is of universal application must apply.
in daryao v. the state of u.p. 1961 2 scr 591. this court applied the doctrine of res judicata in respect of application under article 32 of the constitution.
it is perhaps pertinent to observe here that when the allahabad high court was moved by the petitioner under article 226 of the constitution against the order of assessment, passed on an alleged misconstruction of the notification of december 14, 1957, the high court rejected the petition on two grounds.
the first ground given was that the petitioner had the alternative remedy of getting the error corrected by appeal the second ground given was expressed by the high court in the following words we have, however, heard the learned counsel for the petitioner on merits also, but we are not satisfied that the interpretation put upon this notification by the sales tax officer contains any obvious error in it.
the circumstances make the interpretation advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner unlikely.
it is admitted that even handmade biris have been subject to sales tax since long before the date of the issue of the above notification.
the object of passing the additional duties of excise goods of special importance central act number 58 of 1957, was to levy an additional excise duty on certain important articles and with the concurrence of the state legislature to abolish sales tax on those articles.
according to the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner during the period 14th december, 1957, to 30th june, 1958, the petitioner was liable neither to payment of excise duty nor to payment of sales tax.
we do not know why there should have been such an exemption.
the language of the notification might well be read as meaning that the notification is to apply only to those goods on which an additional central excise duty had been levied and paid.
if the observations quoted above mean that the high court rejected the petition also on merits, apart from the other ground given, then the principle laid down in daryao v. the state of u.p. 1961 2 s.c.a.
591. will apply and the petition under article 32 will not be maintainable on the ground of res judicata.
it is, however, not necessary to pursue the question of res judicata any further, because i am resting my decision on the more fundamental ground that an error of law or fact committed by a judicial body cannot, in general, be impeached otherwise than on appeal unless the erroneous determination relates to a matter on which the jurisdiction of that body depends.in malkarjun narhari 1950 279 lr a 216, 225. the privy council dealt with a case in which a sale took place after notice had been wrongly served upon a person who was not the legal representative of the judgment-debtors estate, and the executing court had erroneously decided that he was to be treated as such representative.
the privy council said in so doing the court was exercising its jurisdiction.
it made a sad mistake, it is true but a court has jurisdiction to decide wrong as well as right.
if it decides wrong, the wronged party can only take the course prescribed by law for setting matters right and if that course is not taken the decision, however wrong, cannot be disturbed .
the above view finds support from a number of decisions of this court.
1. aniyoth kunhamina umma v. ministry of rehabilitation 1962 1 scr 505. .
in this case it had been held under the administration of evacuee property act, 1950, that a certain person was an evacuee and that certain plots of land which belonged to him were, therefore, evacuee property and vested in the custodian of evacuee property.
a transferee of the land from the evacuee then presented a petition under article 32 for restoration of the lands to her and complained of an infringement of her fundamental right, under article 19 1 f and article 31 of the constitution by the aforesaid orders under the administration of evacuee property act.
the petitioner had been a party to the proceedings resulting in the declaration under that act earlier mentioned.
this court held that as long as the decision under the administration of evacuee property act which had become final stood, the petitioner could not complain of any infringement of any fundamental right.
this court dismissed the petition observing we are basing our decision on the ground that the competent authorities under the act had come to a certain decision, which decision has now become final the petitioner not having moved against that decision in an appropriate court by an appropriate proceedings.
as long as that decision stands, the petitioner cannot complain of the infringement of a fundamental right, for she has not such right.
2. gulabdas company v. assistant collector of customs 1957 air sc 733, 736 .
in this case certain imported goods had been assessed to customs tariff.
the assessee contenued in a petition under article 32 that the duty should have been charged under a different item of that tariff and that its fundamental right was violated by reason of the assessment order charging it to duty under a wrong item in the tariff.
this court held that there was no violation of fundamental right and observed if the provisions of law under which impugned orders have been passed are with jurisdiction, whether they be right or wrong on fact, there is really no question of the infraction of a fundamental right.
if a particular decision is erroneous on facts or merits, the proper remedy is by way of an appeal .
3. bhatnagar company limited v. the union of india 19