--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 4611 of 2014 arising out of slp civil number 19379/2013 m s. soma isolux nh one tollway private limited .
appellant versus harish kumar puri ors.
respondents j u d g m e n t gyan sudha misra, j. 1. leave granted.
2. this appeal by special leave has been filed assailing the order dated 27.5.2013 passed by the high court of punjab and haryana at chandigarh in c.m.no.
3301/2013 arising out of cwp number 13848/1998 whereby certain adverse directions to be related hereinafter were issued having grave implication on the contractual rights of the appellant- m s. soma isolux nh one tollway pvt.
limited hereinafter referred to as the concessionaire company as it was saddled with a fine of rs.60 crores and rs.7 crores to be paid by the appellant-concessionaire company and its director respectively which were to be deposited with the registrar general of the high court within one month of the date of the order.
the respondent number6 national highways authority of india shortly referred to as the nhai was further directed to proceed in the matter forthwith and take possession of the highway project and ensure that collection of toll is deposited in a separate account and the work of repairs of the highway commenced within a week and the work of construction of highway commenced and completed within a month thereafter.
the high court further issued direction that the entire matter relating to the contract, the completion of the work of the highway, collection from tolls without existence of six- lanes be enquired into and a report in that regard be placed before the high court within three months.
it was also made clear that the enquiry shall not be construed to be an excuse to delay the construction of the highway.
it was further observed that the chairman, nhai shall be personally responsible for ensuring that the work of six-laning of the highway between panipat and jullunder is completed within six months failing which the chairman, nhai would be held personally liable to pay fine similar to the terms imposed on the concessionaire company respondent number7.
the appellant-concessionaire company has, therefore, come up to this court challenging the impugned order passed by the high court.
3. the substantial questions of law of general and public importance that emerge for consideration in this appeal inter alia may be crystallised as follows i whether the directions issued by the high court which have far reaching consequences against the petitioner appellant and which directions by a judicial fiat, has the effect of nullifying the terms of the concession agreement dated 09.05.2008 defeating the rights and obligations arising therefrom in a public interest litigation while exercising jurisdiction under article 226 of the constitution of india is an act of judicial overreach under the garb of public interest?
ii whether the terms and conditions of a concluded contract can be nullified by the high court by issuing sweeping directions in an ongoing public interest litigation petition which renders the terms and conditions of the concession agreement between the contracting parties redundant at the instance and initiative of the court itself when such directions has not even been sought by any of the parties to the public interest petition?
iii whether a bench of the high court which is seized of a particular dispute would be justified in not taking note of the final judgment and order passed earlier by a co-ordinate bench settling the said controversy in view of which no direction could be issued by the high court nullifying the contractual rights of the affected party?
4. in order to appreciate and adjudicate the controversy involved and to put the matter in proper perspective certain factual background may be related which disclose that this appeal by way of special leave petition has its genesis in a writ petition bearing cwp number 13848/1998 which came to be filed in the high court of punjab and haryana at chandigarh as a public interest litigation on 25.7.1998 by the respondent number1 herein harish kumar puri whose son had died in a road accident on 14.5.1996 at pipli chowk, kurukshetra due to the criminal negligence alleged on the part of the traffic police posted on the said chowk.
in the pil, the respondent number1 mr. puri prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing for enforcement of traffic rules and to maintain the signal system, rumble strips on crossing, first aid units, control over speeding on g.t. road national highway number1 and a further writ or direction holding the state functionaries liable for the criminal negligence on the part of its employees and saddle it with monetary liability.
5. interestingly, this writ petition which was filed as a pil with the laudable object of improving management of traffic on the highway in the interest of the commuters and the public at large o

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

ver the years metamorphosed into a long drawn litigation alleging breach of contractual obligations between the appellant-concessionaire company and the respondent number7 nhai wherein the respondent union of india as also the respondent pil petitioner in the high court have jumped into the fray giving rise to several rounds of litigation.
in the process it affected the very purpose and object for which the writ petition had been filed as also the construction of the highway for which a concession agreement had been executed between the appellant-concessionaire company and the respondent number6 nhai by way of a competitive bidding process during pendency of the pil as a step towards resolving the issue of management of traffic.
6. while tracing out the background of the matter, bereft of not so essential factual details, it may be sufficient to state that the division bench of the high court issued notice of motion on 1.9.1998 in the writ petition pil which came up before the high court for consideration from time to time spanning over several years and finally on 11.4.2002, an order was passed by the high court on 11.4.2002 for impleading the secretary to the government of india, ministry of road transport and highways, new delhi when the issue camp up regarding non- opening of the railway bridge near dera bassi for the general public.
several years thereafter, notice was also issued to the national highways authority of india nhai to appear before the high court through its authorized representative as on 9.5.2008 a concession agreement had been executed between nhai and the appellant-company since the appellant succeeded in a competitive bidding process by which it was granted exclusive rights, license and authority to construct, operate and maintain its project namely, six-laning of a part of nh 1 from km 96.00 to km 387.100 approximately 291.10 km from panipat to jullundur for a period of 15 years.
while awarding the contract, the credentials and track record of the appellant was taken note of which indicated that the appellant m s soma isolux nh one tollway pvt.
limited is a joint venture company with isolux corsan group which is a multinational company having vast experience of infrastructure development in various part of the world including europe, south america, north america and asia and has successfully developed highway projects in various countries including spain, mexico, brazil, india etc. isolux corsan group is the leading european investor in infrastructure in india and m s soma enterprise limited is a renowned development construction firm and has several national highway projects in the past 13 years and have completed projects ahead of schedule.
it has also undertaken and completed projects in other infrastructure sectors like irrigation hydro power and railways.
7. the concession agreement envisaged reciprocal obligations from various parties including nhai, the state of haryana and the state of punjab.
under clause 4.1.2 a nhai is was required to provide right of way and the appellant-company is was entitled to demand and collect appropriate fee commonly known as toll fee from vehicles and persons liable to pay toll fee for using the national highway.
the concession agreement was drafted as per the model approved by the planning commission of india and the draft concession was in fact circulated with the rfp tender document and, therefore, neither the appellant-company nor the nhai could have changed the contents of the agreement pursuant to the award of contract.
8. in so far as the financing and investment to the highway project is concerned the agreement envisaged that the appellant-company and the nhai would be on the basis of build, operate, trade bot mode which enumerated that the project being in bot mode, all investment in the project will have to be made by the appellant-company by the income generated from toll collection and no amount was to be invested received from the nhai.
on the contrary, the appellant-company as per the agreement, offered to pay to the respondent nhai premium equal to 20.14 per cent of the total collection of toll for the first year and this premium was to be increased by one per cent every subsequent year.
based on a detailed analysis of the concession agreement, the nhai thus is not only not funding any part of the project development cost, it is receiving a significant portion of the revenue collected as premium by way of collection of toll.
however all the amount collected by way of toll were to be deposited in the escrow account as a result of which any amount from this account cannot be withdrawn by the appellant without signature from the other contracting party i.e. nhai.
it may further be noted that the agreement between the appellant and respondent nhai acknowledges and confirms the role of lending institutions, mainly nationalised banks as a major significant holder in project implementation.
all the financial agreement dealing in the administration occurred between lending institutions and the appellant and the financial model for the project had been submitted regarding revenue and approval prior to the commencement of the project.
agreement entered into between the appellant company and the nhai also envisages continuous support and co-operation from the respective state governments of punjab and haryana and the concession agreement as per article 47.3 requires the execution of tripartite state support agreement between nhai, concessionaire and respective state governments for which support agreements were signed by the state of punjab on 11.9.2009 and the state of haryana on 16.9.2009.
as per the agreement six laning was to be retrofitted on the existing four-lane as per standards and specifications which temporarily was to put the travelling public to some inconvenience.
on 8.9.2008, the division bench of the high court which was seized of the matter passed an order impleading m s. himalayan expressway limited as respondent number7 herein and on 11.9.2009 the state support agreement mentioned hereinbefore was executed between the governor of the state of punjab, nhai and the appellant-company regarding the obligations of the government of punjab and its continued support for grant of certain rights and authorities for mobilization of resources by the appellant-company.
the agreement visualizes continuous support and co-operation of the government of punjab.
9. in the meantime, the writ petition public interest litigation which was pending in the high court during pendency of which the concession agreement was executed, continued to be taken up by the high court and various directions came to be passed from time to time by the high court in course of hearing of the pil.
10.
the high court thereafter vide order dated 2.1.2012 on an oral request impleaded the appellant-company as a party respondent and issued notice to it on 2.1.2012 to ascertain the progress of the highway project.
the appellant-company responded to the notice and sought time to file its reply.
thereafter, on 28.1.2012, an affidavit was filed by the project chairman, nhai, ambala before the high court in the pending pil informing the status of panipat jullundur section of nh 1 stretch from km 96.000 to km 387.100 wherein it was stated that the concessionaire-appellant company could not achieve the milestone ii on the specified date due to delay in various clearance, tree cutting, utility shifting etc. and further stated that the scheduled six laning date has been extended to 15.6.2012.
in the meantime and in response to the notice, the appellant also had filed affidavit on 12.3.2012 giving details of the progress of the construction on the highway as also the difficulties and impediments encountered in the construction.
11.
the high court however refused to consider even remotely the reasons for the delay in the progress of the highway construction, much less scrutinized it and further failed to examine or even visualise as to why the appellant concessionaire company, which within a period of three years had constructed 71 of the highway project had suddenly slowed down for the rest 29 of the project.
in the process it further refused to consider whether there were bonafide reasons for the delay on the part of the appellant concessionaire company or the delay was on account of the impediments created by the nhai violating the terms and conditions of the agreement as also ignored even the reasoned judicial orders passed earlier by a co-ordinate bench of the punjab and haryana high court itself which had permitted the appellant to shift the toll plaza in view of the terms and conditions in the agreement which were conveniently ignored by the nhai contrary to the opinion of its own independent engineer whose opinion in terms of the agreement was binding on the nhai and the same has been upheld by the high court by several judgments and orders settling the controversy.
it further failed to take note of the fact that the high court itself had stayed the show cause notice issued by the nhai to the appellant company for terminating the contract and had it not been stayed ordered to be kept in abeyance, the cause as to whether the delay was on the part of the appellant company or on account of unreasonable stand of the nhai which was contrary to the terms and conditions of the concessionaire agreement would have come to the fore.
however, the high court never addressed itself on these aspects but was pleased to pass an order on 13.3.2012 inter alia directing the functional head of the appellant-company as also the director-officer-incharge of the project to remain present in court on the adjourned date of hearing.
the presence of the chief general manager of the nhai along with the project director was also ordered as it was directed that the representative of the concessionaire company as well as the nhai will come prepared to respond to all questions as may be raised by the court with regard to the completion of the project within a particular time frame and shall also come ready to execute the necessary undertakings before the court for completion of the project with the time schedule.
12.
the matter was thereafter listed before the high court on 22.3.2012 wherein it was submitted that the haryana section of the six lane highway was expected to be complete by december 2012 and the punjab section was expected to be complete by march 2013.
the high court however failed to scrutinise the cause of delay and refused to take into consideration the terms of the concession agreement under which the respondent number6 nhai was under the contractual obligation to grant approval to shifting of toll plazas, straightaway perhaps on an overall impression observed that there has been inordinate delay in conducting the project and hence directed the appellant-company to submit an undertaking before the court for completion of the project as per the schedule mentioned by the appellant number2 before the high court in the form of an affidavit.
13.
in compliance to the same, a detailed affidavit further was filed by the appellant number2 on behalf of the appellant-company wherein it was submitted inter alia that there were certain bottlenecks existing between the appellant company and the respondent nhai in regard to contractual violations which were adversely affecting the efforts of the appellant concessionaire company in achieving the project completion.
however, it was added that the concessionaire-company shall be making all out efforts to complete the project highway within 12 months from the date of clearance of all obstructions that currently existed between the appellant and the nhai.
the high court, however, directed the appellant to file a clarificatory affidavit by 2 oclock on the same date which was submitted in the court.
14.
however, in order to check the authenticity of the difficulties expressed by the appellant, the high court thought it appropriate to get it verified by directing the parties to hold a joint meeting of the appellant concessionaire company and the respondent nhai and any other authority that may be involved and steps be taken to remove the obstructions and difficulties in completing the construction of the highway if that were found to be actually existing.
it was also directed that a report in this regard including such steps as may be taken for completing the project be submitted before the high court.
15. in pursuance to the order passed by the high court, a meeting was held on 12.4.2012 under the chairmanship of secretary to the government of punjab, department of public works b r between the appellant-company represented by the appellant number2 and other officers of the appellant-company and various officials including that of the nhai.
another meeting also took place on 14.4.2012 between the officers of the state of haryana, the officers of the appellant-company and various officials including that of the nhai.
an affidavit was, thereafter, filed by the director of appellant-company on behalf of the appellant-company to complete the project obviously anticipating that the respondent nhai will remove the impediments which was coming in the way of completing the project which was also the contractual obligation of the respondent nhai.
16.
the division bench of the high court however, did not feel convinced and satisfied, hence passed an order on 19.4.2012 wherein it observed that the appellant-company is not serious about the undertaking given to the court and that it entertained serious doubts with regard to sincerity of the appellant-company to complete the work within the time frame undertaken.
the high court, therefore, directed that in the event of work not completed on schedule which was december 2012 and march 2013 which were the dates furnished by the appellant-company to complete the project before the court, it would be liable to pay a sum of rs. 50 crores by way of penalty and its director shri patri ramachandra rao who was responsible for running the day-to-day affairs of the company would be personally liable to the extent of rs. 5 crores.
the high court further observed that the concession agreement appears to be one sided in its application i.e. in favour of the concessionaire and contrary to public interest ignoring the fact that the terms and conditions of the agreement were in consonance with the guidelines of the planning commission which had been approved by the government of india.
the high court thereafter directed that the matter be listed after two months for further monitoring.
17.
the appellant in the meantime preferred a special leave petition civil number cc 8974/2012 before this court on 3.5.2012 which was later dismissed as subsequent development had taken place in the high court itself.
thereafter, the division bench of the high court on 6.7.2012 modified the order dated 19.4.2012 and increased the penalty to be paid by the appellant-company to rs.
60 crores and the personal liability of the director of the appellant number1 company to rs. 7 crores in case the project was not completed within the time granted by the court on 19.4.2012.
18. on 3.8.2012 when the matter was further listed before the high court, the counsel for the appellant-company informed the court that the nhai had issued a show cause notice to the appellant as to why the contract be not terminated.
the high court, however, passed an order that the operation of the show cause notice issued by the nhai be kept in abeyance till further orders.
in the said order, the high court also directed the ministry of defence, government of india to pass an appropriate order regarding the land needed for widening of nh 1 falling within the area of jullundur cantt.
in the state of punjab and granted 15 days time to the authorities concerned to do the needful.
the high court vide order dated 24.8.2012 also directed the ministry of defence, government of india to hand over the land for widening of the national highway forming part of the concession agreement against which the ministry of defence approached this court by filing a special leave petition bearing number 26544-26545/2012 which however were dismissed vide order dated 5.9.2012 granting further six weeks time to the authorities concerned to comply with the orders and directions issued by the high court.
the ministry of defence, government of india, thereafter handed over the land for the project to the appellant in october 2012 after dismissal of the special leave petitions before the supreme court on 5.9.2012.
according to the appellants plea the work at the said defence land could not commence due to utility shifting, boundary wall shifting in 4 kms. of length.
19. in order to explain and highlight the impediments faced by the appellant-company seeking extension of time to fufill its undertaking, the appellant company filed an application bearing c.m. number 14936/2012 in the pending writ petition in the high court of punjab and haryana at chandigarh which is pending disposal.
it was stated therein that the appellant concessionaire company was making every effort to complete the six laning works at the earliest provided there was complete co-operation by all concerned and work was not hampered for any reason beyond the control of the concessionaire as the agreement itself envisaged continuous support and co-operation from the respective state governments of punjab and haryana and the concession agreement as per article 47.3.
20.
the appellant in its application came up with a case that the highway in question commenced on 11.5.2009 which was the appointed date and the appellant has been diligently proceeding with the work upon declaration of the appointed date by the respondent.
however, the project work were adversely affected on account of several impediments, delays, which according to the appellant are solely attributable to the respondent nhai.
the appellant company submitted that it has been carrying on its obligation under the existing concession agreement towards construction of the aforesaid six lane highway earnestly in a professional manner and to the best of its ability and in spite of the impediments and difficulties, obstructions and hindrances, the appellant-concessionaire till date has completed 71.06 per cent of the work in the project highway as on may 2013.
however, due to certain circumstances beyond the control of the appellant-company, the project was getting delayed.
the appellant while explaining the delay, stated that in spite of extremely adverse site conditions since commencement of the project, it has managed to complete substantial portions of the project highway because of its well preparedness and adequate mobilization of resources.
it has been submitted on behalf of the appellant that the appellant-concessionaire is fully geared up for the completion of the project provided the two main impediments obstacles namely the stringent conditions of mining in the states of punjab and haryana and the shifting of toll plaza which was hampering the only source of revenue for the concessionaire were resolved which were the main reasons for non-completion of the project highway.
thus, it had been submitted that the flow of work in the project highway had been hindered slowed down due to various reasons beyond the control of the appellant-company which was primarily attributable to the nhai.
21.
since the high court by its impugned judgment and order has permitted the nhai to take away the project from the appellant due to slow progress of the national highway project and has also imposed heavy fine on the company for violating its undertaking in completing the project, the appellant has sought to explain the reasons in detail for the alleged slowing down of the project.
it has been stated that one of the major constraints that the appellant faced and which vitally affected the normal flow of work of the project in question was and is the non-availability of an essential raw material, namely, stone aggregate in the states of punjab and haryana due to the stringent conditions of mining of the said material in haryana with effect from 1.3.2010 and in punjab with effect from january 2011.
however, in course of arguments the plea regarding non- availability of supply of raw material, namely, stone aggregate was not seriously pressed as it was submitted that the appellant would try to sort it out and avail the material from the adjoining states.
22.
what has seriously been contested and is the core contentious issue between the appellant and the respondent-nhai, which is hindering the completion work of the project highway is non-relocation of the toll plazas by the nhai at two locations at km 110 and km 211 at karnal and ambala for which the appellant-concessionaire had approached the appropriate authority ever since march 2010 which is hampering the only source of revenue for the appellant-concessionaire company.
it has been explained that as per the policy of nhai referred to hereinbefore approved by the planning commission and as per the concession agreement entered into between the parties, tolling is allowed during the construction of the project from four laning to six laning.
article 3 of the concession agreement which grants the concessionaire by virtue of article 3.1.2. d entitled the concessionaire to demand, collect appropriate fee from vehicles and persons liable for payment of fee for using the project highway or any part thereof or refuse entry of any vehicle if the fee due toll fee is not paid.
internal accruals from the tolls during construction are part of the financing package agreed with the lenders and critical to enable financing for the project as already recorded hereinbefore.
23.
on the question of relocation of toll plaza, it has been submitted that the concession agreement allows the appellant company to choose the location of toll plazas in consultation with the independent engineer and the authority as per the explicit provisions in this regard agreed between the parties in the concession agreement.
in this context, attention of this court has been invited to clause 2.1 of schedule c and article 48 of the concession agreement which reads as follows- clause 2.1 of schedule c toll plaza means the structure and barriers erected on the project highway for the purpose of regulating the entry and exist of vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this agreement and shall include all land, buildings, equipment and other facilities required in accordance with or incidental to the provisions of this agreement situated at locations to be decided by the concessionaire as per schedule d in consultation with nhai and ie.
the tentative locations of the toll plazas are given in appendix-i. article 48 defines toll plaza as the structure and barriers erected of the project highway for the purpose of regulating the entry and exit of vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this agreement and shall include all land, buildings, equipment and other facilities required in accordance with or incidental to the provisions of this agreement provided that such toll plazas shall not be erected within a distance of 20 km and 10 km from the notified urban of karnal, ambala, ludhiyana, jalandhar cities and gharonda, nilokhere, kurushetra, shahabad, rajpura, sirhind mandi govindgarh, khanna, doraha, sahniwal, pillore, goraya, phagwara towns respectively as notified on the date of this agreement and shall be situated at locations to be decided by the concessionaire in consultation with the independent engineer.
24.
placing heavy reliance on the aforesaid clause of the concession agreement, learned senior counsel dr. abhishek m. singhvi has submitted on behalf of the appellant-concessionaire that it has the exclusive right in accordance with the provisions of the concession agreement to choose the location of toll plazas in consultation with the independent engineer and nhai.
it was, therefore, submitted that the existing toll plazas at km 146 and km 212 were proposed to be shifted to km 110 and km 182 with the 3rd toll plaza at km 328 retained at the existing location in view of the contractual rights of the appellant to fix the toll plaza location and recommendations of independent engineer for relocation of the existing toll plaza at km 146 and km 212 to km 110 and km 211 respectively vide letter dated 9.11.2010 issued by the ministry of road transport and highways to the regional officer punjab and haryana , national highways authority of india, the appellant started the construction of toll plazas and subsequently the haryana government on 4.7.2011 put forward the requirement to shift the toll plaza from the approved location at km 182 to km 211 in consultation with the respondent.
it has further been stated that based on the discussion between the haryana government and the respondent on the issue, the respondent sought consent of the appellant regarding proposal of the haryana government for shifting of toll plaza to km 211 in lieu of the toll plaza at km 182 for which the in principal approval was granted earlier.
25.
in order to honour the proposal of haryana government and keeping in view the national interest and public utility of the project, the appellant agreed to follow the proposal of haryana government to relocate the toll plaza at km 211 instead of km 182.
the appellant reserved its rights regarding the shifting of toll plaza as per the provisions of the concession agreement while communicating its willingness to follow the proposal of haryana government as suggested by the respondent.
subsequently, the respondent nhai gave approval for relocation of toll from km 213 to km 211.550 to 212.250 on the basis of recommendation of the independent engineer, consent of appellant and the government of haryana vide its letter dated 11.10.2011.
26.
the aforesaid order of shifting of toll plaza gave rise to further litigation as a fresh spate of public interest litigations were filed in november 2011 in the high court of punjab and haryana against the relocations of toll plazas since a writ petition bearing cwp number 21332/2011 gram panchayat dangdehri ors.
vs. union of india ors. was filed against the relocation of toll plaza km 110 but the same was dismissed by the high court of punjab and haryana vide order dated 25.1.2012 wherein it was held as follows moreover, shifting of toll plaza from the present location to the proposed location seems to be bona fide in view of the fact that at the present location flyover has to be constructed to ease the traffic flow within stipulated time as per the agreement.
development and construction of national highway should not be stopped for the simple reason that some of the residents shall face inconvenience or shall be burdened with toll fee.
the high court further held the nhai and concessionaire while choosing the site for installation of toll tax have to consider viability, availability of space location including financial aspect .therefore, action decision to shift toll plaza within 1.5 km from ambala muncipal limit does not seem to be unjustified, arbitrary or in violation of rules 2008 shifting of toll plaza is necessitated to facilitate construction of flyover at the present site.
27.
another writ petition being cwp number 23971/2011 vishal nagrath ors.
vs. union of india ors. had also been filed challenging the relocation of toll plaza at 211 km 212 km but the same was dismissed by the high court of punjab and haryana vide order dated 1.5.2012 wherein another bench of the high court had also not found any infirmity in the decision of the respondents appellant herein and nhai to relocate the toll plaza and they were held to be well within their right to evaluate the location of the toll plaza considering the fact that they were being located with reference to the entire project of 291 km and the requirement was to have only three toll plazas which had to be so located that they did not result in a situation of peristalsis movement of the traffic or even create bottlenecks.
the court went on to hold that such decisions were to be left to the wisdom of the agencies involved in the execution of the project and merely because another location may be perceived to be the better one, cannot be a ground to warrant judicial interference.
28.
the pil petitioners challenged this order of the single judge by filing a letters patent appeal bearing lpa number 170/2012 but this was also dismissed by the high court of punjab and haryana vide order dated 6.12.2012.
while dismissing the appeal, the learned judges of the division bench had clearly held which is extracted hereinunder the argument that the shifting of the toll plaza is actuated with arbitrariness or mala fide is also to be rejected.
learned single judge, in this behalf has remarked, and rightly so, that the shifting of toll plaza to the present location seems to be bonafide in view of the fact that at the present location fly over has to be constructed to ease the traffic flow within stipulated time as per the agreement and development and construction of national highway should not be stopped for the simple reason that some of the residents shall face inconvenience or shall be burdened with toll fee.
before we close, we would also like to point out the submission of learned senior counsel for the national highway authority of india as well as the concessionaire to the effect that in so far as the local residents are concerned, they would have to pay the toll at much lesser rate, which is projected at rs. 150/- per month per vehicle.
normally, the choosing of location of toll plaza is to be left to the parties concerned.
when in the present case, two states as well as government undertaking like the national highway authority of india are involved in the decision making process and they have considered financial aspects, the courts are ill equipped to go into the rationale of such decisions.
after it is found that the decision is bonafide it does not suffer from any oblique motive and it is not in violation of any statutory provisions, no further judicial scrutiny on the merits of such a decision is admissible in law.
we, therefore, do not find any merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
the judgment and order passed in the lpa was thereafter never challenged either by the pil petitioner or the respondent nhai or the respondent- harish kumar puri and this judgment and order passed in the lpa thus attained finality.
29.
however, despite the orders passed by the high court of punjab and haryana and approval granted by the respondent nhai, the appellant has been prevented from commencing tolling at located toll plaza at 211 km and 110 km due to which it is contended that the appellant is gravely affected and is losing substantial fund due to non-commencing of tolling at the located toll plazas that could have been utilized for the construction of the project.
it has been urged that the nhai has all along been consistently stating that the toll plaza relocation is as per the concession agreement.
based on this assurance, the lenders have continued disbursement to the project.
thus, the respondent by granting of approval and re-affirming the appellant concessionaire right to relocate the plazas, has induced the appellant and lenders to invest in construction of the project but the nhai has now reversed its decision after 2 years in spite of giving the in principal approval.
30.
it has been submitted by dr. singhvi that the above change in stand of the respondent on the toll plaza relocation and disallowing the appellant-concessionaires rights under the concession agreement has a material adverse affect on the concession as the entire investment on the project was based on its right to enforce the provision for shifting the toll plazas i.e. fixing the toll plaza location to have optimum toll collection as envisaged in its financial model.
as a result, the lenders have stated that they cannot continue disbursing to the project without the appellant being allowed to collect toll from the new locations.
31.
it appears that the appellant although had succeeded in the high court of punjab and haryana on the dispute regarding shifting of toll plaza, the appellant approached the high court of delhi in view of clause 47.1 of the concession agreement under section 9 of the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996 by filing omp number 321/2013 which is pending disposal before the delhi high court wherein the appellant inter alia has raised several issues before the high court of delhi includi