--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil original appellate jurisdiction writ petition c number 223 of 2009 m s. nova ads petitioner versus metropolitan transport corporation and ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondents with c.a. number 11037 of 2014 slp c number 276/2007 c.a. number 11038 of 2014 slp c number 852/2007 c.a. number 11039 of 2014 slp c number 11880/2009 j u d g m e n t dipak misra, j. leave granted in all the special leave petitions.
2. the present batch of appeals characterizes series of collusive concessions, maladroit misrepresentations, designed negotiations and infusion of fraud on financial morality and further epitomises how statutory corporations can cultivate the proclivity to give indecent burial to their interests, which is fundamentally collective interest that the corporations are duty bound to protect, preserve and assert for.
that apart, this bunch also exposes, as we have painfully penned, how the state, the protector of the interest of the citizens, has constantly maintained sphinx-like silence and also for some unfathomable reason, dexterously ignored the financial misdeeds as a colossal mute spectator.
it seems all have either eloquently or silently competed with each other to write the epitaph of law.
but, a pregnant one, there is a watch-dog, the petitioner in writ petition c number 223/2009, despite being wedded to individual interest, thought it apposite to uncurtain the machinations adopted by the respondent numbers 3 to 8 and the metropolitan transport corporation chennai limited mtcl which had filed slp c number 16908/2006 against k.s. kumar raja another and later on chose not to press the same.
the painfully unusual thing, has been allowed to happen.
3. the litigation has a history.
the mtcl issued advertisements for erection and maintenance of certain bus shelters, both lit and non-lit and in response to the said advertisement, m s. aim associates approached the 1st respondent for taking of the work of erection and maintenance of bus shelters on build, operate and transfer on sponsorship basis.
it was based on the principle of first come, first serve.
specific areas had been allotted in favour of the respondents to the writ petition who have also preferred appeals by way of special leave.
the agreement entered into by the mtcl with the sponsors was to remain valid for one year with the stipulation that the same shall be renewed every year for next nine years subject to the performance of the sponsors and compliance of all the terms and conditions of the agreement to the best satisfaction of the mtcl.
similar sponsorship agreements had been entered into with the other sponsors for construction and maintenance of bus shelters in the city of chennai.
in 2003, as various disputes arose pertaining to the sponsorship agreement, respondent numbers 3 to 8 to the writ petition, invoked the jurisdiction of the high court under article 226 of the constitution.
while the said writ petitions were pending, k.s. kumar raja, the 9th respondent to the writ petition, also preferred a writ petition before the high court challenging the authority of the mtcl in allotting contract for erection and maintenance of bus shelters.
4. dealing with all the writ petitions, the high court passed a common order on 5.9.2006.
be it stated, along with the writ petition, certain writ appeals were disposed of by the high court.
the high court adverted to the facts in w.p.
c number 318/2004 which was filed by k.s. kumar raja, the sole proprietor, city advertising systems, chennai who had questioned the tender notification dated 31.3.2003 published in dina bhoomi, a daily newspaper.
by the said tender notification, mtcl had called for tenders from intending buyers for erection of bus shelters on the road margins within the city of chennai.
the said k.s. kumar raja had also preferred w.p. number 34872/2003 calling in question the legal acceptability of the order dated 7.11.2003 of the commissioner, municipal corporation of chennai for short, the corporation informing him that the erection and maintenance of bus shelters in chennai city was being dealt with by the mtcl and, therefore, he should approach the said authority.
it was contended before the high court that it was obligation of the corporation to provide bus shelters for the convenience of commuters.
it was averred that initially various bus stops were identified and allotted on first come, first serve basis and consequently for the successful tenderer, permission was also granted to erect shelters under the royalty scheme.
the writ petitioner had submitted an application to the respondent corporation for allotment of specified location for establishment of shelters but the same did not evoke any response.
the reminders also fell on deaf ears.
being aggrieved by the said non-response, he had approached the high court in w.p. number 26890/2003 seeking a direction to the corporation to consider his representation and the high court had directed the corporation to pass appropriate orders on the representation within a specific period.
pursuant to the order passed by the high court, the corporation on 7.11.2003 him that the construction and maintenance of a shelter in chennai city was being dealt by the mtcl.
at that juncture, mtcl invited tenders which constrained him to file the writ petition assailing the said order.
5. it was contended before the high court that mtcl has no jurisdiction authority to erect the bus shelters on its own or to give permission to the sponsors for erection as per the provisions contained in section 285 of the chennai city municipal corporation act, 1919 for brevity, the act .
the corporation filed its counter affidavit contending, inter alia, that the government in g.o.ms number 14, municipal administration and water supply department dated 11.1.1983 had allowed the mtcl to provide bus shelters to passengers and also to maintain them, and hence, it had the authority.
thus, the corporation conceded to the authority of the mtcl solely on the basis of the aforesaid notification issued by the government.
the high court, addressed itself with regard to the competent authority under the act who is entitled to build bus shelters for passengers or enter into an arrangement for the said purpose.
scanning the provisions of the act and appreciating the administrative instructions, it came to hold that none of the provisions of the act empowers the government for issuing such notification that reliance placed on the government order is unacceptable that the road margin including the margin of public streets has to be controlled and managed by the corporation as they vest in it that mtcl has no jurisdiction to allow any sponsor either to erect or illuminate the bus shelters that the order passed by the commissioner requiring the petitioner therein to approach the mtcl was inapposite and deserved to be quashed that the tender notification issued by the mtcl was legally unsustainable and that the mtcl has no power either to grant or cancel the allotment.
being of this view, the high court dismissed the writ petitions filed by the sponsors and allowed the writ petitions filed by k.s. kumar raja.
it is seemly to state here that the high court had issued certain directions, which we think it apt to reproduce i the commissioner, corporation of chennai shall identify the road margins for erection of bus shelters and for the said purpose he can take the opinion advice of the metropolitan transport corporation ii on such identification of the location for erection of bus shelters, the commissioner corporation of chennai shall call for tenders from intending sponsors iii the corporation council is also entitled to resolve to allow metropolitan transport corporation to locate bus shelters and maintain the same and in such an event, the metropolitan transport corporation would identify the locations and erect bus shelters on the basis of the terms and conditions imposed by the council. iv the above exercise, viz., to identify the location and advertise on its own or empower the metropolitan transport corporation to erect the bus shelters, shall be implemented by the corporation, on or before the end of december 2006. v till such time, the petitioners viz., the sponsors are entitled to continue their activities in relation to the shelters established, subject to payment of rs. 49,500/- per shelter for one module of 20 x 4 size shelters and a sum of rs.99,000/- for the second module consists of 40 x 4 shelters. vi the above said amount shall be paid to the corporation of chennai entirely in advance along with a copy of this order.
on such payment, the commissioner, corporation of chennai shall allow the petitioner to continue their business till the end of december 2006. vii it is made clear that the above arrangement is basically made only in the interest of the commuters as they must be provided with the shelter and removal of the shelter will not be in the interest of either the writ petitioners or of the metropolitan transport corporation or of the commuters in general.
hence, the commissioner should strictly adhere to the timings prescribed in this order for taking the decision, whether to go for an advertisement on its own or leave the entire matter to the transport corporation the respective claims both by the sponsors as well as the transport corporation arising out of the contract are left open to be resolved by them before the appropriate forum.
6. challenging the said order, the aggrieved parties filed various special leave petitions and as has been stated earlier mtcl had also filed special leave petition.
this court had initially issued notice, and passed an interim order but thereafter during the pendency of special leave petitions the mtcl and the aggrieved contracting parties entered into a settlement.
the settlement that was entered between the parties is necessitous to be reproduced 1 that the parties would refer all the past disputes and their mutual claims to arbitration in respect of the disputed period 01.02.2003 to 31.03.2005.
all payments made after 01.04.2005 will be adjusted as against the then current dues as claimed by the petitioners. 2 that the petitioner in slp c number 276 and slp c number 852 of 2007 would be entitled to 500 shelters and they would be granted a 12 year license period with further extension, on condition that the entire 500 shelters, as per list, would be converted into international standard bus shelters with advertisement space not exceeding 30 sq. mtrs per shelter, within 13 months time from the date of the order. 3 the license fee payable for this period would be rs. 30,000/- per annum with an escalation of 10 once in every three years considering the huge investment involved in erecting the international standard bus shelters.
7. on the basis of the said settlement a prayer was made for listing the matter and accordingly an order came to be passed on 30.06.2008, which is as follows slp c number 276/07 and slp c number 852/07, filed by aim associate limited and m s front line media etc., respectively, are taken up on mentioning.
having regard to i.a. number 3/08 filed in slp c number 276/07 and i.a. number 2/08 in slp c 852/07, wherein it has been mentioned that the matter has been settled between the parties, the terms whereof are filed in the form of memo, annexed to the said applications, we disposed of both these special leave petitions by the following order.
the memos signed by the petitioner and the respondent metropolitan transport corporation duly supported by the affidavit of the petitioner and the affidavit of shri ramasubramaniam, managing director of metropolitan transport corporation, filed in the connected slp c number 16908 of 2006, are taken on record and these special leave petitions are disposed of in terms of the said memos.
the parties shall bear their own costs in these proceedings.
slp c number 16908/06 filed by the metropolitan transport corporation, chennai, limited, is also taken up for consideration along with i.a. number2/08 filed therein.
in view of the order passed hereinabove in the earlier two special leave petitions, no orders are necessary in this special leave petition.
the special leave petition is disposed of accordingly and the question of law raised in the petition is left open for decision in appropriate proceeding.
8. be it noted, to the said settlement, chennai municipal corporation was not a party.
it needs no solomons wisdom that by such a settlement the interest of the corporation was seriously affected, for the high court had categorically opined that it was within the authority of the corporation to have control over the public roads as per the provisions contained in the act.
9. at this juncture, it is condign to mention that during the pendency of the special leave petitions, an agreement was entered into between the appellants and mtcl and as has been stated earlier, the court has disposed of the matter on the basis of the settlement on 30.6.2008.
at this stage, we think it apt to refer to the agreement that has been entered into between mtcl and m s. metro multimedia, a firm controlled by m s. aim associates, m s. front line media, m s. graphite publicities, m s. s.s. international, m s. vaishnavi images and m s. white horse communications network dated 24.09.2008.
the reference to the said agreements is extremely significant, for it throws immense light on the conduct of the parties.
the relevant clauses from the said agreements are as follows and whereas mtcl had permitted the firms for erection of various bus shelters by entering into individual agreements.
and whereas a dispute arose between the firms and mtcl, regarding the certain legal rights to continue with reference to issues pertaining to payment of royalty amounts for the period of 2003 to 2005.
and whereas both the mtcl, and the firms duly agitated their respective rights before the honble supreme court of india, subsequent to the disposal of legal proceedings by the honble high court of madras.
and whereas considering the overall issues all the parties herein had agreed for arriving at an appropriate settlement on such other terms and conditions and also agreed to resolve their past dispute once for all before the honble supreme court of india.
and whereas the honble supreme court of india had passed orders on 30th june 2008 in slp c number 16908/2006, 276/2007 and 852/2007 recording the terms as set out in the memo and had permitted both mtcl, and the firms to implement the said order and had disposed all the cases pending before the honble supreme court of india.
xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx that in compliance with the orders of honble supreme court of india in slp c number 16908/2006, 276/2007 and 852/2007 mtcl agrees to allot 500 numbers of bus shelters to the concessionaire for erection re-erection of the shelters of international standard for the benefit of the waiting bus passengers and the concessionaire agrees to convert the existing bus shelters of international standard where there is no bus shelters.
the concessionaire agrees to erect the above bus shelters of international standard at its own cost and in return agrees to pay the royalty amount at the rates hereinafter appearing.
xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx the concessionaire agrees to buy royalty amount to mtcl during the period of 12 years.
the royalty amount shall be paid at the rate of rs.30000/- per year per international standard bus shelter with an escalation of 10 once in every three years over the previous rate.
the period of agreements as well as the royalty payment starts from 01.09.2008.
xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx this agreement is valid for 12 years from 01.09.2008 with further extension on condition that the entire 500 bus shelters, as per list, would be converted into international standard bus shelters with advertisement space not exceeding 30 sq.mtrs per shelter, within 12 months from 01.09.2008.
10.
as the factual matrix undrape, m s. nova ads, filed the writ petition civil number 223/2009 for recall of the order passed by this court on many a ground.
on 11.01.2011, the following order came to be passed this writ petition has been filed for recall of the order passed by this court on 30th june, 2008, in slp c number16908 of 2006, filed by the metropolitan transport corporation against one k.s. kumar raja anr., together with two other special leave petitions filed by some of the private parties, namely, aim associates limited and m s. front line media etc.
2. by virtue of the said order, on a submission made by the parties that a settlement has been arrived at, we had disposed of the special leave petitions on the basis of such submissions.
3. in this writ petition, it has been sought to be indicated that the said order had been passed despite an earlier order in the same matter.
4. having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and in particular mr. mohan parasaran, learned asg, that the subject-matter of the special leave petitions was confined to 500 bus shelters, out of which a number of shelters had already been constructed to a large extent, we recall the order which we had passed earlier on 30th june, 2008, and restore all the three special leave petitions to file.
we also, however, clarify that such order had been passed upon agreement by the parties at that stage.
we also clarify that whatever steps that have been taken so far on the basis of the said order, will be subject to the final result of the special leave petitions.
5. this order is passed without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties at the time of the hearing of the special leave petitions.
7. liberty given to file additional documents.
11.
going back to the clauses in the agreement, it is luminescent that there is a reference to the order passed by the high court and the order dated 30.6.2008 wherein this court has recorded the settlement.
the high court had unequivocally held that the mtcl has no authority to enter into any agreement in respect of the bus shelters and only the corporation has the authority under the law.
the chennai corporation was not a party to the settlement.
it is interesting to note that from the clauses incorporated in the agreement, it is reflective as if there was a direction by this court to enter into this kind of settlement.
the disturbing part is that the mtcl has entered into the agreement which has to remain valid for 12 years with the consortium of six firms without calling for tenders.
these facts are not only bewildering, but really shocking.
12.
in this background, the seminal question that is required to be addressed first is whether under the act it is the corporation or the mtcl has the authority to deal with bus shelters for passengers.
mr. c.a. sundaram, mr. v. giri and mr. ravindra srivastava, learned senior counsel appearing for various parties in different appeals would contend that the high court has fallen into error in its appreciation of the provisions of the act and has erroneously come to hold that corporation has the authority to exercise the powers for providing shelters to the passengers and to deal with the shelters for any commercial venture and the said transport undertakings are to be controlled and managed by the corporation and the mtcl has no authority to grant permission for establishing the bus shelters or to deal with them in any manner.
it is further urged by them that the high court has failed to take note of the fact that at the time the state government had conferred the power on mtcl to deal with the matter, the corporation was under supersession and hence, the state government had the authority to act on behalf of the corporation and delegate the power authority to mtcl and, therefore, there was no illegality in dealing with the same.
resisting the aforesaid contentions, it is submitted by mr. rohtagi, learned attorney general that the analysis made by the high court cannot be found fault with because it is in consonance with the principles of interpretation.
similar submission has also been canvassed by mr. subramonium prasad, learned aag for the state of tamil nadu and mr. c.u. singh, learned counsel for the writ petitioner.
as far as the authority of the state government is concerned, it is urged by them that by the time the notification was issued, the elected body had come into existence and, therefore, the state government could not have acted on behalf of the corporation.
13. to appreciate the controversy, certain statutory provisions need to be referred to.
sections 2 6 and 2 7 that define carriage and cart respectively read as follows carriage - carriage means any wheeled vehicle with springs or other appliances acting as springs and includes any kind of bicycle, tricycle, rickshaw and palanquin but does not include any motor vehicle within the meaning of the motor vehicles act, 1939 central act iv of 1939 .
cart - cart includes any wheeled vehicle which is not a carriage but does not include any motor vehicle within the meaning of the motor vehicles act, 1939 central act iv of 1939 .
14.
keeping the said definitions in view, we shall proceed to deal with certain other provisions of the act.
chapter ix of the act deals public streets.
section 203 reads as follows 203.
vesting of public streets and their appurtenances in corporation - 1 all public streets in the city not reserved under the control of the central or the state government, with the pavements, stones and other materials thereof, and all works, materials implements and other things provided for such streets, all drains, drainage works, tunnels and culverts whether made at the cost of the municipal fund or otherwise, in alongside or under any street, whether public or private, and all works, materials, implements and other things appertaining thereto and all trees not being private property growing on public streets or by the side thereof, shall vest in the corporation. 2 the state government may by notification withdraw any such street drain, drainage work, tunnel, culvert, or tree from the control of the corporation.
15. from the aforesaid provisions, it is quite vivid that all public streets and their appurtenances which are not reserved under the control of the central or state government shall vest in the corporation.
thus the reservation as engrafted under the provision is only meant for the central government or the state government.
sub-section 2 of section 203 enables the state government to issue a notification withdrawing any street, drain, drainage, tunnel, culvert or tree from the control of the corporation.
it is submitted by mr. rohtagi that section 203 1 of the act, barring certain streets, vests everything in the corporation.
the state government has been conferred the power by the legislature to withdraw certain streets and other things from the control of the corporation, for the legislature in its wisdom has thought it appropriate to carve out an exception from section 203 1 and enabled the state to deal with it after issue of a notification.
as we perceive the said provision, public streets which have been vested in the corporation, unless it is reserved for the central government or the state government or unless a notification is issued to withdraw in respect of certain streets and other things from the control of the corporation, it has the absolute control.
this is the plainest meaning that can be placed on the aforesaid provision, for it does not admit of any other interpretation.
16.
section 204 deals with maintenance and repair of streets.
it reads as follows 204.
maintenance and repair of streets - the corporation shall cause the public streets to be maintained and repaired and make all improvements thereto which are necessary or expedient for the public safety or convenience.
17.
the aforesaid provision clearly envisages that it is the duty of the corporation to maintain, repair and improve the streets which are necessary and expedient for public safety and convenience.
the key words are safety and convenience and that is the responsibility of the corporation.
18. section 214 provides for protection of appurtenances and materials of streets.
it lays down that it shall not be lawful for any person, without the permission of the commissioner, to displace, take up or make any alteration in the fence, posts, pavement, flags or other materials of any public street.
the commissioner, needless to say, is the commissioner of the corporation.
thus, it is clear that no alteration can take place without the permission of the commissioner, for it is the duty of the corporation to maintain the streets and also it is obliged to see the convenience of the public.
19. section 214-a prescribes the power of the corporation to recover expenses caused by extraordinary traffic.
section 220 deals with prohibition against obstruction in streets.
the said provision stipulates that no one shall build any wall or erect any fence or other obstruction or projection or make any encroachment in or over any street or any public place the control of which is vested in the corporation.
section 222 empowers the commissioner to remove encroachments by following certain procedures.
section 223 deals with power to allow certain projections and erections.
section 223-a deals with the power of the council to set up hoardings and levy fees.
as the learned attorney general has highlighted the said provision to bolster the proposition that it is the corporations authority to deal with bus shelters and the hoardings advertisements put on those shelters, it is apposite to reproduce the same 223-a. power of council to setup hoardings and levy fees - subject to the provisions of the madras open places prevention of disfigurement act, 1959 ii of 1959 and section 129-a to 129-f of this act, the commissioner may, with the sanction of the council, set up, for the exhibition of advertisements, hoardings, erections or other things in suitable place owned by, or vested in the corporation and may permit any person to use any such hoardings, erection or thing on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by regulations made by the council in this behalf.
explanation i. - for the purpose of section 129-d and 129-e the person who has been permitted to use any hoarding, erection or thing under this section shall be in addition to the advertisements taxes payable by him under section 129-a or advertisements exhibited by him on such hoarding, executing or thing.
explanation ii. - for the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any fee payable by any person to use any hoarding, erection or thing under this section shall be deemed to be the owner or the person in occupation of such hoarding, erection or thing.
20.
laying emphasis upon the aforesaid quoted provision, it is urged by mr. rohtagi that exhibition of any advertisements, hoardings, erections or other things in a suitable place owned by, or vested in the corporation has to be dealt with by the council and the commissioner can set up places with the sanction of the council and the said act has to be done on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by the regulations by the council in that behalf.
it is his submission that the corporation has been conferred the power by the legislature and it cannot be scuttled by any authority.
21.
at this juncture, it is apt to refer to section 285 of the act.
it deals with the provision of landing places, cart-stands, etc.
it is as follows- 285.
provisions of landing places, cart-stands, etc. - 1 the commissioner may construct or provide public landing places, halting places, cart-stand, cattle-shed and cow-house and may charge and levy such fees for the use of the same as the standing committee may fix.
explanation - a cart stand shall, for the purpose of this act, include a stand for carriages including motor vehicles within the meaning of the motor vehicles act, 1939 and animals. 2 a statement of the fees fixed by the standing committee for the use of such place, shall be put up in english and tamil in a conspicuous part thereof. 3 the commissioner may farm out the collection of such fees for any period not exceeding three years at a time, on such terms and conditions as he may think fit.
22.
this provision has its own significance.
it empowers the commissioner to construct or provide public landing places, halting places, cart-stand, cattle-shed and cow-house and for levy of fees for the use of the same, which is determined by the standing committee of the corporation.
the cart-stand, as the explanation would show, for the purposes of the act, includes stand for carriages including motor vehicles within the meaning of motor vehicles act, 1939 for short, the 1939 act .
the definition of motor vehicle under the 1939 act reads as follows motor vehicle means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer but does not include a vehicle running upon fixed rails or used solely upon the premises of the owner.
the aforesaid definition indubitably would include a bus.
keeping the same in view, we are to examine section 285-a which has been emphasised by the learned counsel for the parties.
the said provision reads as follows- 285-a - prohibition of use of public place or sides of public street as cart-stand etc. - where the commissioner has provided a public landing place, halting place, cart-stand, cattle-shed, or cow-house, he may prohibit the use for the same purpose by any person within such distance thereof as may be determined by the standing committee of any public place or the sides of any public street provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorise the commissioner to prohibit the use of any place in the city by the state government as a stand solely for motor vehicles belonging to the transport department of the state government.
23. section 285-b deals with recovery of cart-stand fees, etc. on a scrutiny of the said provision, it is limpid that the commissioner of the corporation has the power to take appropriate action for the purpose of recovery, if the fee leviable under sub-section 1 of section 285-b is not paid.
section 285-c deals with licence fee for private cart-stand.
the provision also postulates that no person shall open a new cart-stand or keep open a private-cart stand unless he obtains from the commissioner a licence to do so and the owner of a place is required to apply for licence.
section 285-c 5 provides for the licence fee and 285-c 6 provides the period of licence.
24.
a conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions make it absolutely plain that the corporation has the power under the act to control the cart- stand which includes a stand for carriages including motor-vehicles and levy fees and also provide for licence, even for private cart-stand.
25. learned counsel for the appellants have laid immense emphasis on section 203 2 and proviso to section 285-a which we have already reproduced hereinbefore.
section 203 2 as has been stated earlier, empowers the state government to issue a notification to withdraw any such street, drain, drainage work, tunnel, culvert, or tree from the control of the corporation.
a reference is made to the notification issued by the state government to pyramid the submission that the entire area where the bus shelters have been constructed, has been withdrawn from the control of the government.
we will advert to the same when we interpret the said notification at a later stage.
suffice it to say that section 203 2 has to be understood as an exception to section 203 1 and there has to be a specific notification, for the words used therein are as such.
they have their own signification.
26.
presently, we shall advert to the proviso to section 285-a. section 285-a has to be read in conjunction with section 285.
section 285 empowers the commissioner to construct or provide public landing places, halting places, cart-stand, etc.
the explanation includes a stand for carriages that includes motor vehicles within the definition of cart-stand.
section 285-a authorises the commissioner to prohibit use of public place or sides of public street as cart-stand, etc. by any person within such distance which has to be determined by the standing committee.
the proviso carries out an exception which stipulates that nothing contained in section 285-a shall be deemed to authorise the commissioner to prohibit the use of any place in the city by the state government as a stand solely for motor vehicles belonging to the transport department of the state government.
27. learned counsel appearing for the appellants would conten