--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal number 1750 of 2008 hardeep singh appellant versus state of punjab ors.
respondents with criminal appeal number 1751 of 2008 manjit pal singh appellant versus state of punjab anr.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 9184 of 2008 babubhai bhimabhai bokhiria anr.
appellants versus state of gujarat ors.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 7209 of 2010 rajendra sharma anr.
appellants versus state of m.p. anr.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 5724 of 2009 ravinder kumar anr.
appellants versus state of haryana ors.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 5975 of 2009 tej pal anr.
appellants versus state of haryana ors.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 9040 of 2010 juned pahalwan appellant versus state of u.p. anr.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 5331 of 2009 rajesh sanjai appellant versus state of u.p. anr.
respondents with special leave petition crl. number 9157 of 2009 ramdhan mali anr.
appellants versus state of rajasthan anr.
respondents with special leave petition crl.
numbers 4503-4504 of 2012 tej singh appellant versus state of u.p. respondent j u d g m e n t dr. b.s. chauhan, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

this reference before us arises out of a variety of views having been expressed by this court and several high courts of the country on the scope and extent of the powers of the courts under the criminal justice system to arraign any person as an accused during the course of inquiry or trial as contemplated under section 319 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 hereinafter referred to as the cr.p.c. .
2. the initial reference was made by a two-judge bench vide order dated 7.11.2008 in the leading case of hardeep singh crl.
appeal number 1750 of 2008 where noticing the conflict between the judgments in the case of rakesh v. state of haryana, air 2001 sc 2521 and a two- judge bench decision in the case of mohd.
shafi v. mohd.
rafiq anr., air 2007 sc 1899, a doubt was expressed about the correctness of the view in the case of mohd.
shafi supra .
the doubts as categorised in paragraphs 75 and 78 of the reference order led to the framing of two questions by the said bench which are reproduced hereunder 1 when the power under sub-section 1 of section 319 of the code of addition of accused can be exercised by a court?
whether application under section 319 is not maintainable unless the cross-examination of the witness is complete? 2 what is the test and what are the guidelines of exercising power under sub-section 1 of section 319 of the code?
whether such power can be exercised only if the court is satisfied that the accused summoned in all likelihood would be convicted?
3. the reference was desired to be resolved by a three-judge bench whereafter the same came up for consideration and vide order dated 8.12.2011, the court opined that in view of the reference made in the case of dharam pal ors.
v. state of haryana anr., 2004 13 scc 9, the issues involved being identical in nature, the same should be resolved by a constitution bench consisting of at least five judges.
the bench felt that since a three-judge bench has already referred the matter of dharam pal supra to a constitution bench, then in that event it would be appropriate that such overlapping issues should also be resolved by a bench of similar strength.
4. reference made in the case of dharam pal supra came to be answered in relation to the power of a court of sessions to invoke section 319 cr.p.c.
at the stage of committal of the case to a court of sessions.
the said reference was answered by the constitution bench in the case of dharam pal ors.
v. state of haryana anr., air 2013 sc 3018 hereinafter called dharam pal cb , wherein it was held that a court of sessions can with the aid of section 193 cr.p.c.
proceed to array any other person and summon him for being tried even if the provisions of section 319 cr.p.c.
could not be pressed in service at the stage of committal.
thus, after the reference was made by a three-judge bench in the present case, the powers so far as the court of sessions is concerned, to invoke section 319 cr.p.c.
at the stage of committal, stood answered finally in the aforesaid background.
5. on the consideration of the submissions raised and in view of what has been noted above, the following questions are to be answered by this bench ?
i what is the stage at which power under section 319 cr.p.c.
can be exercised? ii whether the word evidence used in section 319 1 cr.p.c.
could only mean evidence tested by cross-examination or the court can exercise the power under the said provision even on the basis of the statement made in the examination-in-chief of the witness concerned? iii whether the word evidence used in section 319 1 cr.p.c.
has been used in a comprehensive sense and includes the evidence collected during investigation or the word evidence is limited to the evidence recorded during trial? iv what is the nature of the satisfaction required to invoke the power under section 319 cr.p.c.
to arraign an accused?
whether the power under section 319 1 cr.p.c.
can be exercised only if the court is satisfied that the accused summoned will in all likelihood convicted? v does the power under section 319 cr.p.c.
extend to persons not named in the fir or named in the fir but not charged or who have been discharged?
6. in this reference what we are primarily concerned with, is the stage at which such powers can be invoked and, secondly, the material on the basis whereof the invoking of such powers can be justified.
to add as a corollary to the same, thirdly, the manner in which such power has to be exercised, also has to be considered.
7. the constitutional mandate under articles 20 and 21 of the constitution of india, 1950 hereinafter referred to as the constitution provides a protective umbrella for the smooth administration of justice making adequate provisions to ensure a fair and efficacious trial so that the accused does not get prejudiced after the law has been put into motion to try him for the offence but at the same time also gives equal protection to victims and to the society at large to ensure that the guilty does not get away from the clutches of law.
for the empowerment of the courts to ensure that the criminal administration of justice works properly, the law was appropriately codified and modified by the legislature under the cr.p.c.
indicating as to how the courts should proceed in order to ultimately find out the truth so that an innocent does not get punished but at the same time, the guilty are brought to book under the law.
it is these ideals as enshrined under the constitution and our laws that have led to several decisions, whereby innovating methods and progressive tools have been forged to find out the real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not go unpunished.
the presumption of innocence is the general law of the land as every man is presumed to be innocent unless proven to be guilty.
8.
alternatively, certain statutory presumptions in relation to certain class of offences have been raised against the accused whereby the presumption of guilt prevails till the accused discharges his burden upon an onus being cast upon him under the law to prove himself to be innocent.
these competing theories have been kept in mind by the legislature.
the entire effort, therefore, is not to allow the real perpetrator of an offence to get away unpunished.
this is also a part of fair trial and in our opinion, in order to achieve this very end that the legislature thought of incorporating provisions of section 319 cr.p.c.
9. it is with the said object in mind that a constructive and purposive interpretation should be adopted that advances the cause of justice and does not dilute the intention of the statute conferring powers on the court to carry out the above mentioned avowed object and purpose to try the person to the satisfaction of the court as an accomplice in the commission of the offence that is subject matter of trial.
10.
in order to answer the aforesaid questions posed, it will be appropriate to refer to section 351 of the criminal procedure code, 1898 hereinafter referred to as old code , where an analogous provision existed, empowering the court to summon any person other than the accused if he is found to be connected with the commission of the offence.
however, when the new cr.p.c. was being drafted, regard was had to 41st report of the law commission where in the paragraphs 24.80 and 24.81 recommendations were made to make this provision more comprehensive.
the said recommendations read 24.80 it happens sometimes, though not very often, that a magistrate hearing a case against certain accused finds from the evidence that some person, other than the accused before him, is also concerned in that very offence or in a connected offence.
it is proper that magistrate should have the power to call and join him in proceedings.
section 351 provides for such a situation, but only if that person happens to be attending the court.
he can then be detained and proceeded against.
there is no express provision in section 351 for summoning such a person if he is not present in court.
such a provision would make section 351 fairly comprehensive, and we think it proper to expressly provide for that situation.
24.81 section 351 assumes that the magistrate proceeding under it has the power of taking cognizance of the new case.
it does not, however, say in what manner cognizance is taken by the magistrate.
the modes of taking cognizance are mentioned in section 190, and are apparently exhaustive.
the question is, whether against the newly added accused, cognizance will be supposed to have been taken on the magistrates own information under section 190 1 , or only in the manner in which cognizance was first taken of the offence against the accused.
the question is important, because the methods of inquiry and trial in the two cases differ.
about the true position under the existing law, there has been difference of opinion, and we think it should be made clear.
it seems to us that the main purpose of this particular provision is that the whole case against all known suspects should be proceeded with expeditiously and convenience requires that cognizance against the newly added accused should be taken in the same manner against the other accused.
we, therefore, propose to recast section 351 making it comprehensive and providing that there will be no difference in the mode of taking cognizance if a new person is added as an accused during the proceedings.
it is, of course, necessary as is already provided that in such a situation the evidence must he reheard in the presence of the newly added accused.
11. section 319 cr.p.c.
as it exists today, is quoted hereunder 319 cr.p.c.
-power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence.- 1 where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which such person could be tried together with the accused, the court may proceed against such person for the offence which he appears to have committed. 2 where such person is not attending the court, he may be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of the case may require, for the purpose aforesaid. 3 any person attending the court, although not under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he appears to have committed. 4 where the court proceeds against any person under sub- section 1 , then- a the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard b subject to the provisions of clause a , the case may proceed as if such person had been an accused person when the court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced.
12. section 319 cr.p.c.
springs out of the doctrine judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur judge is condemned when guilty is acquitted and this doctrine must be used as a beacon light while explaining the ambit and the spirit underlying the enactment of section 319 cr.p.c.
it is the duty of the court to do justice by punishing the real culprit.
where the investigating agency for any reason does not array one of the real culprits as an accused, the court is not powerless in calling the said accused to face trial.
the question remains under what circumstances and at what stage should the court exercise its power as contemplated in section 319 cr.p.c.?
the submissions that were raised before us covered a very wide canvas and the learned counsel have taken us through various provisions of cr.p.c.
and the judgments that have been relied on for the said purpose.
the controversy centers around the stage at which such powers can be invoked by the court and the material on the basis whereof such powers can be exercised.
13.
it would be necessary to put on record that the power conferred under section 319 cr.p.c.
is only on the court.
this has to be understood in the context that section 319 cr.p.c.
empowers only the court to proceed against such person.
the word court in our hierarchy of criminal courts has been defined under section 6 cr.p.c., which includes the courts of sessions, judicial magistrates, metropolitan magistrates as well as executive magistrates.
the court of sessions is defined in section 9 cr.p.c.
and the courts of judicial magistrates has been defined under section 11 thereof.
the courts of metropolitan magistrates has been defined under section 16 cr.p.c.
the courts which can try offences committed under the indian penal code, 1860 or any offence under any other law, have been specified under section 26 cr.p.c.
read with first schedule.
the explanatory note 2 under the heading of classification of offences under the first schedule specifies the expression magistrate of first class and any magistrate to include metropolitan magistrates who are empowered to try the offences under the said schedule but excludes executive magistrates.
14.
it is at this stage the comparison of the words used under section 319 cr.p.c.
has to be understood distinctively from the word used under section 2 g defining an inquiry other than the trial by a magistrate or a court.
here the legislature has used two words, namely the magistrate or court, whereas under section 319 cr.p.c., as indicated above, only the word court has been recited.
this has been done by the legislature to emphasise that the power under section 319 cr.p.c.
is exercisable only by the court and not by any officer not acting as a court.
thus, the magistrate not functioning or exercising powers as a court can make an inquiry in particular proceeding other than a trial but the material so collected would not be by a court during the course of an inquiry or a trial.
the conclusion therefore, in short, is that in order to invoke the power under section 319 cr.p.c., it is only a court of sessions or a court of magistrate performing the duties as a court under the cr.p.c.
that can utilise the material before it for the purpose of the said section.
15. section 319 cr.p.c.
allows the court to proceed against any person who is not an accused in a case before it.
thus, the person against whom summons are issued in exercise of such powers, has to necessarily not be an accused already facing trial.
he can either be a person named in column 2 of the chargesheet filed under section 173 cr.p.c.
or a person whose name has been disclosed in any material before the court that is to be considered for the purpose of trying the offence, but not investigated.
he has to be a person whose complicity may be indicated and connected with the commission of the offence.
16.
the legislature cannot be presumed to have imagined all the circumstances and, therefore, it is the duty of the court to give full effect to the words used by the legislature so as to encompass any situation which the court may have to tackle while proceeding to try an offence and not allow a person who deserves to be tried to go scot free by being not arraigned in the trial in spite of possibility of his complicity which can be gathered from the documents presented by the prosecution.
17.
the court is the sole repository of justice and a duty is cast upon it to uphold the rule of law and, therefore, it will be inappropriate to deny the existence of such powers with the courts in our criminal justice system where it is not uncommon that the real accused, at times, get away by manipulating the investigating and or the prosecuting agency.
the desire to avoid trial is so strong that an accused makes efforts at times to get himself absolved even at the stage of investigation or inquiry even though he may be connected with the commission of the offence.
18. coming to the stage at which power under section 319 cr.p.c.
can be exercised, in dharam pal supra , this court had noticed the conflict in the decisions of kishun singh ors v. state of bihar, 1993 2 scc 16 and ranjit singh v. state of punjab, air 1998 sc 3148, and referred the matter to the constitution bench.
however, while referring the matter to a constitution bench, this court affirmed the judgment in kishun singh supra and doubted the correctness of the judgment in ranjit singh supra .
in ranjit singh supra , this court observed that from the stage of committal till the sessions court reaches the stage indicated in section 230 cr.p.c., that court can deal with only the accused referred to in section 209 cr.p.c.
and there is no intermediary stage till then for the sessions court to add any other person to the array of the accused, while in kishun singh supra , this court came to the conclusion that even the sessions court has power under section 193 cr.p.c.
to take cognizance of the offence and summon other persons whose complicity in the commission of the trial can prima facie be gathered from the materials available on record and need not wait till the stage of section 319 cr.p.c.
is reached.
this court in dharam pal supra held that the effect of ranjit singh supra would be that in less serious offences triable by a magistrate, the said court would have the power to proceed against those who are mentioned in column 2 of the charge-sheet, if on the basis of material on record, the magistrate disagrees with the conclusion reached by the police, but, as far as serious offences triable by the court of sessions are concerned, that court will have to wait till the stage of section 319 cr.p.c.
is reached.
19.
at the very outset, we may explain that the issue that was being considered by this court in dharam pal cb , was the exercise of such power at the stage of committal of a case and the court held that even if section 319 cr.p.c.
could not be invoked at that stage, section 193 cr.p.c.
could be invoked for the said purpose.
we are not delving into the said issue which had been answered by the five-judge bench of this court.
however, we may clarify that the opening words of section 193 cr.p.c.
categorically recite that the power of the court of sessions to take cognizance would commence only after committal of the case by a magistrate.
the said provision opens with a non-obstante clause except as otherwise expressly provided by this code or by any other law for the time being in force.
the section therefore is clarified by the said opening words which clearly means that if there is any other provision under cr.p.c., expressly making a provision for exercise of powers by the court to take cognizance, then the same would apply and the provisions of section 193 cr.p.c.
would not be applicable.
20. in our opinion, section 319 cr.p.c.
is an enabling provision empowering the court to take appropriate steps for proceeding against any person not being an accused for also having committed the offence under trial.
it is this part which is under reference before this court and therefore in our opinion, while answering the question referred to herein, we do not find any conflict so as to delve upon the situation that was dealt by this court in dharam pal cb .
21.
in elachuri venkatachinnayya ors.
v. king-emperor 1920 ilr 43 mad 511, this court held that an inquiry is a stage before the committal to a higher court.
in fact, from a careful reading of the judgments under reference i.e. ranjit singh supra and kishun singh supra , it emerges that there is no dispute even in these two cases that the stage of committal is neither an inquiry nor a trial, for in both the cases, the real dispute was whether section 193 cr.p.c.
can be invoked at the time of committal to summon an accused to face trial who is not already an accused.
it can safely be said that both the cases are in harmony as to the said stage neither being a stage of inquiry nor a trial.
22.
once the aforesaid stand is clarified in relation to the stage of committal before the court of sessions, the answer to the question posed now, stands focussed only on the stage at which such powers can be exercised by the court other than the stage of committal and the material on the basis whereof such powers can be invoked by the court.
question number i what is the stage at which power under section 319 cr.p.c.
can be exercised?
23.
the stage of inquiry and trial upon cognizance being taken of an offence, has been considered by a large number of decisions of this court and that it may be useful to extract the same hereunder for proper appreciation of the stage of invoking of the powers under section 319 cr.p.c.
to understand the meaning that can be attributed to the word inquiry and trial as used under the section.
24. in raghubans dubey v. state of bihar, air 1967 sc 1167, this court held once cognizance has been taken by the magistrate, he takes cognizance of an offence and not the offenders once he takes cognizance of an offence it is his duty to find out who the offenders really are and once he comes to the conclusion that apart from the persons sent up by the police some other persons are involved, it is his duty to proceed against those persons.
the summoning of the additional accused is part of the proceeding initiated by his taking cognizance of an offence.
25.
the stage of inquiry commences, insofar as the court is concerned, with the filing of the charge-sheet and the consideration of the material collected by the prosecution, that is mentioned in the charge-sheet for the purpose of trying the accused.
this has to be understood in terms of section 2 g cr.p.c., which defines an inquiry as follows 2 g inquiry means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this code by a magistrate or court.
26.
in state of u.p. v. lakshmi brahman anr., air 1983 sc 439, this court held that from the stage of filing of charge-sheet to ensuring the compliance of provision of section 207 cr.p.c., the court is only at the stage of inquiry and no trial can be said to have commenced.
the above view has been held to be per incurium in raj kishore prasad v. state of bihar anr., air 1996 sc 1931, wherein this court while observing that section 319 1 cr.p.c.
operates in an ongoing inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, held that at the stage of section 209 cr.p.c., the court is neither at the stage of inquiry nor at the stage of trial.
even at the stage of ensuring compliance of sections 207 and 208 cr.p.c., it cannot be said that the court is at the stage of inquiry because there is no judicial application of mind and all that the magistrate is required to do is to make the case ready to be heard by the court of sessions.
27.
trial is distinct from an inquiry and must necessarily succeed it.
the purpose of the trial is to fasten the responsibility upon a person on the basis of facts presented and evidence led in this behalf.
in moly anr.
v. state of kerala, air 2004 sc 1890, this court observed that though the word trial is not defined in the code, it is clearly distinguishable from inquiry.
inquiry must always be a forerunner to the trial.
a three-judge bench of this court in the state of bihar v.ram naresh pandey anr., air 1957 sc 389 held the words tried and trial appear to have no fixed or universal meaning.
no doubt, in quite a number of sections in the code to which our attention has been drawn the words tried and trial have been used in the sense of reference to a stage after the inquiry.
that meaning attaches to the words in those sections having regard to the context in which they are used.
there is no reason why where these words are used in another context in the code, they should necessarily be limited in their connotation and significance.
they are words which must be considered with regard to the particular context in which they are used and with regard to the scheme and purpose of the provision under consideration. emphasis added 28.
in ratilal bhanji mithani v. state of maharashtra ors., air 1979 sc 94, this court held once a charge is framed, the magistrate has no power under section 227 or any other provision of the code to cancel the charge, and reverse the proceedings to the stage of section 253 and discharge the accused.
the trial in a warrant case starts with the framing of charge prior to it the proceedings are only an inquiry.
after the framing of charge if the accused pleads not guilty, the magistrate is required to proceed with the trial in the manner provided in sections 254 to 258 to a logical end. emphasis added 29.
in v.c. shukla v. state through c.b.i., air 1980 sc 962, this court held the proceedings starting with section 238 of the code including any discharge or framing of charges under section 239 or 240 amount to a trial 30.
in union of india ors.
v. major general madan lal yadav retd.
, air 1996 sc 1340, a three-judge bench while dealing with the proceedings in general court martial under the provisions of the army act 1950, applied legal maxim nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria no one can take advantage of his own wrong , and referred to various dictionary meanings of the word trial and came to the conclusion it would, therefore, be clear that trial means act of proving or judicial examination or determination of the issues including its own jurisdiction or authority in accordance with law or adjudging guilt or innocence of the accused including all steps necessary thereto.
the trial commences with the performance of the first act or steps necessary or essential to proceed with the trial. emphasis supplied x x x x our conclusion further gets fortified by the scheme of the trial of a criminal case under the code of criminal procedure, 1973, viz., chapter xiv conditions requisite for initiation of proceedings containing sections 190 to 210, chapter xviii containing sections 225 to 235 and dealing with trial before a court of sessions pursuant to committal order under section 209 and in chapter xix trial of warrant cases by magistrates containing sections 238 to 250 etc.
it is settled law that under the said code trial commences the moment cognizance of the offence is taken and process is issued to the accused for his appearance etc.
equally, at a sessions trial, the court considers the committal order under section 209 by the magistrate and proceeds further.
it takes cognizance of the offence from that stage and proceeds with the trial.
the trial begins with the taking of the cognizance of the offence and taking further steps to conduct the trial. emphasis supplied 31.
in common cause, a registered society thr.
its director v. union of india ors., air 1997 sc 1539, this court while dealing with the issue held i in case of trials before sessions court the trials shall be treated to have commenced when charges are framed under section 228 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 in the concerned cases.
ii in cases of trials of warrant cases by magistrates if the cases are instituted upon police reports the trials shall be treated to have commenced when charges are framed under section 240 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973, while in trials of warrant cases by magistrates when cases are instituted otherwise than on police report such trials shall be treated to have commenced when charges are framed against the concerned accused under section 246 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973.
iii in cases of trials of summons cases by magistrates the trials would be considered to have commenced when the accused who appear or are brought before the magistrate are asked under section 251 whether they plead guilty or have any defence to make. emphasis added 32.
in raj kishore prasad supra , this court said that as soon as the prosecutor is present before the court and that court hears the parties on framing of charges and discharge, trial is said to have commenced and that there is no intermediate stage between committal of case and framing of charge.
33.
in in re narayanaswamy naidu v. unknown 1 ind cas 228, a full bench of the madras high court held that trial begins when the accused is charged and called on to answer and then the question before the court is whether the accused is to be acquitted or convicted and not whether the complaint is to be dismissed or the accused discharged.
a similar view has been taken by madras high court subsequently in sriramulu v. veerasalingam, 1914 i.l.r.
38 mad.
585.
34.
however, the bombay high court in dagdu govindshet wani v. punja vedu wani 1936 38 bom.l.r.
1189 referring to sriramulu supra held there is no doubt that the court did take the view that in a warrant case the trial only commences from the framing of the charge but, according to my experience of the administration of criminal justice in this presidency, which is not inconsiderable, the courts here have always accepted the definition of trial which has been given in gomer sirda v. queen- empress, 1898 i.l.r.
25 cal. 863, that is to say, trial has always been understood to mean the proceeding which commences when the case is called on with the magistrate on the bench, the accused in the dock and the representatives of the prosecution and, defence, if the accused be defended, present in court for the hearing of the case.
a similar view has been taken by the lahore high court in sahib din v. the crown, 1922 i.l.r.
3 lah.
115, wherein it was held that for the purposes of section 350 of the code, a trial cannot be said to commence only when a charge is framed.
the trial covers the whole of the proceedings in a warrant case.
this case was followed in fakhruddin v. the crown, 1924 i.l.r.
6 lah.
176 and in labhsing v. emperor, 1934 35 cr.l.
j. 1261.
35. in view of the above, the law can be summarised to the effect that as trial means determination of issues adjudging the guilt or the innocence of a person, the person has to be aware of what is the case against him and it is only at the stage of framing of the charges that the court informs him of the same, the trial commences only on charges being framed.
thus, we do not approve the view taken by the courts that in a criminal case, trial commences on cognizance being taken.
36. section 2 g cr.p.c.
and the case laws referred to above, therefore, clearly envisage inquiry before the actual commencement of the trial, and is an act conducted under cr.p.c.
by the magistrate or the court.
the word inquiry is, therefore, not any inquiry relating to the investigation of the case by the investigating agency but is an inquiry after the case is brought to the notice of the court on the filing of the charge-sheet.
the court can thereafter proceed to make inquiries and it is for this reason that an inquiry has been given to mean something other than the actual trial.
37.
even the word course occurring in section 319 cr.p.c., clearly indicates that the power can be exercised only during the period when the inquiry has been commenced and is going on or the trial which has commenced and is going on.
it covers the entire wide range of the process of the pre-trial and the trial stage.
the word course therefore, allows the court to invoke this power to proceed against any person from the initial stage of inquiry upto the stage of the conclusion of the trial.
the court does not become functus officio even if cognizance is taken so far as it is looking into the material qua any other person who is not an accused.
the word course ordinarily conveys a meaning of a continuous progress from one point to the next in time and conveys the idea of a period of time duration and not a fixed point of time. see commissioner of income-tax, new delhi now rajasthan v. m s. east west import export p limited now known as asian distributors limited jaipur, air 1989 sc 836 .
38.
in a somewhat similar manner, it has been attributed to word course the meaning of being a gradual and continuous flow advanced by journey or passage from one place to another with reference to period of time when the movement is in progress. see state of travancore-cochin ors.
v. shanmugha vilas cashewnut factory, quilon, air 1953 sc 333 .
39.
to say that powers under section 319 cr.p.c.
can be exercised only during trial would be reducing the impact of the word inquiry by the court.
it is a settled principle of law that an interpretation which leads to the conclusion that a word used by the legislature is redundant, should be avoided as the presumption is that the legislature has deliberately and consciously used the words for carrying out the purpose of the act.
the legal maxim a verbis legis non est recedendum which means, from the words of law, there must be no departure has to be kept in mind.
40.
the court cannot proceed with an assumption that the legislature enacting the statute has committed a mistake and where the language of the statu