--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal numbers 1318-1320 of 2007 alister anthony pareira appellant versus state of maharashtra respondent judgement r.m. lodha, j. on the south-north road at the east side of carter road, bandra west , mumbai in the early hours of november 12, 2006 between 3.45 - 4.00 a.m., a car ran into the pavement killing seven persons and causing injuries to eight persons.
the appellant - alister anthony pareira - was at the wheels.
he has been convicted by the high court for the offences punishable under sections 304 part ii, 338 and 337 of the indian penal code, 1860 ipc .
2. the prosecution case against the appellant is this the repair and construction work of the carter road, bandra west at the relevant time was being carried out by new india construction company.
the labourers were engaged by the construction company for executing the works.
the temporary sheds huts were put up for the residence of labourers on the pavement.
in the night of november 11, 2006 and november 12, 2006, the labourers were asleep in front of their huts on the pavement.
between 3.45 to 4.00 a.m., that night, the appellant while driving the car corolla bearing registration number mh-01-r-580 rashly and negligently with knowledge that people were asleep on footpath
rammed the car over the pavement caused death of seven persons and injuries to eight persons.
at the time of incident, the appellant was found to have consumed alcohol.
a liquor bottle was recovered from the appellants car.
on his medical examination, he was found to have 0.112 w v liquor ethyl alcohol in his blood.
the appellant was fully familiar with the area being the resident of carter road.
3. the contractor--panchanadan paramalai harijan pw-2 - who had engaged the labourers and witnessed the incident reported the matter immediately to the khar police station.
his statement ex. 13 was recorded and based on that a first information report number 838 was registered under section 304, 279, 336, 337, 338 and 427 ipc section 185 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 and section 66 1 b of bombay prohibition act, 1949.
4. on completion of investigation, the charge sheet was submitted against the appellant by the investigating officer in the court of magistrate having jurisdiction.
the appellant was committed to the court of sessions and was tried by 2nd adhoc additional sessions judge, sewree, mumbai.
5. the indictment of the appellant was on two charges.
the two charges read- i that on november 12, 2006 between 3.45 to 4.00 a.m. you have driven the car bearing number mh-01-r-580 rashly and negligently with knowledge that people are sleeping on footpath and likely to cause death of those persons slept over footpath and thereby caused the death of seven persons who were sleeping on footpath on carter road and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc.
ii on above date, time and place you have driven the vehicle in rashly and negligent manner and thereby caused grievous injury to seven persons who were sleeping on footpath and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 338 ipc.
6. the prosecution, to prove the above charges against the appellant, tendered oral as well as documentary evidence.
in all, 18 witnesses, namely, dr. nitin vishnu barve pw-1 , panchanadan paramalai harijan pw-2 , ramchandra chakrawarti pw-3 , pindi ramu pw-4 , sriniwas raman pindi pw-5 , smt.
mariamma shingamana pw-6 , smt.
prema chingaram pw-7 , jagan singaram pw-8 , sigamani shankar pani pw-9 , mallikarjun bajappa motermallappa pw-10 , j.c. cell mendosa pw-11 , praveen sajjan mohite pw- 12 , limbaji samadhan ingle pw-13 , dr. sharad maniklal ruia pw-14 , rajendra nilkanth sawant pw- 15 , basraj sanjeev mehetri pw-16 , meenakshi anant gondapatil pw-17 and somnath baburam phulsunder pw-18 were examined.
the complaint, spot panchnama along with sketch map, c.a. reports and other documents were also proved.
7. the statement of the appellant under section 313 of the criminal procedure code, 1973 for short, the code was recorded.
he admitted that he was driving the car number mh-01-r-580 at the relevant time and the accident did occur but his explanation was that it happened on account of failure of engine and mechanical defect in the car and there was no negligence or rashness on his part.
8.
the 2nd adhoc additional sessions judge, sewree, mumbai, on april 13, 2007 convicted the appellant for the offences punishable under sections 304a and 337 ipc.
the court sentenced him to suffer simple imprisonment of six months with fine of rs. 5 lakhs for the offence under section 304a ipc and in default further suffer simple imprisonment of one month and simple imprisonment of 15 days for the offence under section 337 ipc.
both the sentences were ordered to run concurrently.
9. on april 19, 2007, the bombay high court took suo motu cognizance of the judgment and

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

order dated april 13, 2007 passed by the 2nd adhoc additional sessions judge, sewree and issued notice to the state of maharashtra, the appellant and to the heirs of the deceased and also to the injured persons.
10.
the state of maharashtra preferred criminal appeal number 566 of 2007 under section 378 3 of the code challenging the acquittal of the appellant under sections 304 part ii and 338 ipc.
another criminal appeal number 430 of 2007 was also preferred by the state of maharashtra seeking enhancement of sentence awarded to the appellant for the offence under section 304a and section 337 ipc by the trial court.
11.
the appellant also preferred criminal appeal number 475/2007 for setting aside the judgment and order dated april 13, 2007 passed by the trial court convicting him under section 304a and section 337 ipc and the sentence awarded to him by the trial court.
12.
all these matters were heard together by the high court and have been disposed of by the common judgment on september 6, 2007.
the high court set aside the acquittal of the appellant under section 304 ipc and convicted him for the offences under section 304 part ii, section 338 and section 337 ipc.
the high court sentenced the appellant to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc with a fine of rs. 5 lakhs.
on account of offence under section 338 ipc, the appellant was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year and for the offence under section 337 ipc rigorous imprisonment for six months.
the high court noted that fine amount as per the order of the trial court had already been distributed to the families of victims.
13.
it is from the above judgment of the high court that the present appeals have been preferred by the appellant.
14.
a great deal of argument in the hearing of the appeals turned on the indictment of the appellant on the two charges, namely, the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc and the offence punishable under section 338 ipc and his conviction for the above offences and also under section 337 ipc.
mr. u.u. lalit, learned senior counsel for the appellant argued that this was legally impermissible as the charges under section 304 part ii ipc and section 338 ipc were mutually destructive and the two charges under these sections cannot co-exist.
his submission was that the appellant was charged for the above offences for committing a single act i.e., rash or negligent for causing injuries to eight persons and at the same time committed with knowledge resulting in death of seven persons which is irreconcilable and moreover that has caused grave prejudice to the appellant resulting in failure of justice.
15.
mr. u.u. lalit, learned senior counsel also argued that no question was put to the appellant in his statement under section 313 of the code about his drunken condition or that he was under the influence of alcohol and, thus, had knowledge that his act was likely to result in causing death.
ca report ex. 49 that blood and urine of the appellant had alcohol content and the evidence of pw-1 that he found the appellant in drunken condition and his blood sample was taken were also not put to the appellant.
these incriminating evidences, learned senior counsel submitted, cannot form basis of conviction.
the conclusion arrived at by the investigating officers pw-17 and pw-18 regarding drunken condition of the appellant which was put to the appellant in his statement under section 313 of the code was of no legal use.
moreover, pw-17 and pw-18 have not deposed before the court that the appellant was found in drunken condition much less under the influence of liquor.
learned senior counsel would thus submit that the sole basis of the appellants conviction under section 304 part-ii ipc that the appellant had knowledge that his reckless and negligent driving in a drunken condition could result in serious consequences of causing a fatal accident cannot be held to have been established.
in this regard, learned senior counsel relied upon two decisions of this court, namely, i ghulam din buch ors.
v. state of j k1 and ii kuldip singh ors.
v. state of delhi2.
1 1996 9 scc 239 2 2003 12 scc 528 16.
mr. u.u. lalit vehemently contended that no charge was framed that the appellant had consumed alcohol.
moreover, he submited that no reliance could be placed on c.a. report ex. 49 as the evidence does not satisfactorily establish that the samples were kept in safe custody until they reached the cfsl.
moreover, no charge was framed by the court against the appellant under section 185 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 and section 66 1 b of the bombay prohibition act, 1949.
17. learned senior counsel argued that appellants conviction under section 304a, 338 and 337 ipc was not legally sustainable for more than one reason.
first, no charge under section 304a ipc was framed against the appellant as he was charged only under section 304 part ii ipc and section 338 ipc which are not the offences of the same category.
in the absence of charge under section 304a ipc, the appellant cannot be convicted for the said offence being not a minor offence of section 304 part ii ipc.
the charge under section 338 ipc does not help the prosecution as by virtue of that charge the appellant cannot be convicted under section 304a ipc being graver offence than section 338 ipc.
secondly, the accident had occurred not on account of rash or negligent act of the appellant but on account of failure of the engine.
he referred to the evidence of rajendra nilkanth sawant pw-15 who deposed that he could not state if the accident took place due to dislodging of right side wheel and dislodging of the engine from the foundation.
in the absence of any firm opinion by an expert as regards the cause of accident, the possibility of the accident having occurred on account of mechanical failure cannot be ruled out.
thirdly, in the absence of medical certificate that the persons injured received grievous injuries, charge under section 338 ipc was not established.
18. learned senior counsel lastly submitted that in case the charges against appellant are held to be proved, having regard to the facts, namely, the age of the appellant at the time of the accident the appellant being the only member to support his family - mother and unmarried sister - having lost his father during the pendency of the present appeals the fine and compensation of rs. 8.5 lakhs having been paid and the sentence of two months already undergone, the appellant may be released on probation of good conduct and behavior or, in the alternative, the sentence may be reduced to the period already undergone by the appellant.
19. on the other hand, mr. sanjay kharde, learned counsel for the state of maharashtra stoutly defended the judgment of the high court.
he argued that the fact that labourers were asleep on the footpath has gone unchallenged by the defence.
he would submit that the drunken condition of the appellant is fully proved by the evidence of pw-1.
further, pw-1 has not at all been cross-examined on this aspect.
the recovery of liquor bottle is proved by the evidence of spot panchas pw-11 and pw-16 .
they have not been cross examined in this regard.
pw-17 collected blood sample of the appellant from pw-1 and then pw-18 forwarded the blood sample to the chemical analyzer along with the forwarding letter.
the appellant has not challenged c.a. report ex. 49 in the cross-examination of pw-18.
20. learned counsel for the state submitted that the involvement of the appellant in the incident has been fully established by the evidence of pw-13 who was an eye-witness and working as a watchman at construction site.
moreover, the appellant was apprehended immediately after the incident.
there is no denial by the appellant about occurrence of the accident.
the defence of the appellant was that the accident happened due to engine and mechanical failure but the appellant has failed to probablise his defence.
he referred to the evidence of pw-15 - motor vehicle inspector - to show that the brake and the gear of the car were operative.
21. learned counsel for the state referred to the evidence of injured witnesses and also the evidence of pw-12 and pw-14 who issued medical certificates and submitted that the prosecution has established beyond reasonable doubt that the knowledge was attributable to the accused as he was driving the car in a drunken condition at a high speed.
the accused had the knowledge, as he was resident of the same area, that the labourers sleep at the place of occurrence.
learned counsel submitted that the evidence on record and the attendant circumstances justify attributability of actual knowledge to the appellant and the high court rightly held so.
in this regard, the learned counsel for the state placed reliance upon two decisions of this court in jai prakash v. state delhi administration 3 and joti parshad v. state of haryana4.
he disputed that there was any error in the framing of charge.
he would contend that in any case an error or omission in framing of charge or irregularity in the charge does not invalidate the 3 1991 2 scc 32 4 1993 supp 2 scc 497 conviction of an accused.
the omission about the drunken condition of the accused in the charge at best can be said to be an irregularity but that does not affect the conviction.
in this regard, he relied upon section 464 of the code and the decisions of this court in willie william slaney v. state of madhya pradesh5, dalbir singh v. state of u.p.6 and annareddy sambasiva reddy and others v. state of andhra pradesh7.
22.
mr. sanjay kharde submitted that by not putting c.a. report ex. 49 to the appellant in his statement under section 313 of the code, no prejudice has been caused to him as he admitted in his statement under section 313 of the code that he was fully aware about the statement of the witnesses and exhibits on record.
in this regard, learned counsel relied upon decision of this court in shivaji sahabrao bobade and another v. state of maharashtra8 .
5 air 1956 sc 116 6 2004 5 scc 334 7 2009 12 scc 546 8 1973 2 scc 793 23.
lastly, learned counsel for the state submitted that the circumstances pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the appellant do not justify the benefit of probation to the appellant or reduction of the sentence to the period already undergone.
he submitted that seven innocent persons lost their lives and eight persons got injured due to the act of the appellant and, therefore, no sympathy was called for.
he submitted that sentence should be proportionate to the gravity of offence.
he relied upon the decisions of this court in state of karnataka v. krishnappa9, dalbir singh v. state of haryana10, shailesh jasvantbhai and another v. state of gujarat and others11 and manish jalan v. state of karnataka12.
24. on the contentions of the learned senior counsel for the appellant and the counsel for the respondent, the following questions arise for our consideration 9 2000 4 scc 75 10 2000 5 scc 82 11 2006 2 scc 359 12 2008 8 scc 225 i whether indictment on the two charges, namely, the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc and the offence punishable under section 338 ipc is mutually destructive and legally impermissible?
in other words, whether it is permissible to try and convict a person for the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc and the offence punishable under section 338 ipc for a single act of the same transaction? ii whether by not charging the appellant of drunken condition and not putting to him the entire incriminating evidence let in by the prosecution, particularly the evidence relating to appellants drunken condition, at the time of his examination under section 313 of the code, the trial and conviction of the appellant got affected? iii whether prosecution evidence establishes beyond reasonable doubt the commission of the offences by the appellant under section 304 part ii, ipc, section 338 ipc and section 337 ipc? iv whether sentence awarded to the appellant by the high court for the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc requires any modification?
re question i 25.
section 304 ipc provides for punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
it reads as under s.304.
- punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder - whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
26.
the above section is in two parts.
although section does not specify part i and part ii but for the sake of convenience, the investigators, the prosecutors, the lawyers, the judges and the authors refer to the first paragraph of the section as part i while the second paragraph is referred to as part ii.
the constituent elements of part i and part ii are different and, consequently, the difference in punishment.
for punishment under section 304 part i, the prosecution must prove the death of the person in question that such death was caused by the act of the accused and that the accused intended by such act to cause death or cause such bodily injury as was likely to cause death.
as regards punishment for section 304 part ii, the prosecution has to prove the death of the person in question that such death was caused by the act of the accused and that he knew that such act of his was likely to cause death.
in order to find out that an offence is culpable homicide not amounting to murder - since section 304 does not define this expression - sections 299 and 300 ipc have to be seen.
section 299 ipc reads as under s.-299.
- culpable homicide.--whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
27. to constitute the offence of culpable homicide as defined in section 299 the death must be caused by doing an act a with the intention of causing death, or b with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or c with the knowledge that the doer is likely by such act to cause death.
28.
section 300 deals with murder and also provides for exceptions.
the culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done 1 with the intention of causing death, 2 with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or 3 with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or 4 with the knowledge that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
the exceptions provide that the culpable homicide will not be murder if that act is done with the intention or knowledge in the circumstances and subject to the conditions specified therein.
in other words, the culpable homicide is not murder if the act by which death is caused is done in extenuating circumstances and such act is covered by one of the five exceptions set out in the later part of section 300. 29.
it is not necessary in the present matter to analyse section 299 and section 300 in detail.
suffice it to say that the last clause of section 299 and clause fourthly of section 300 are based on the knowledge of the likely or probable consequences of the act and do not connote any intention at all.
30.
reference to few other provisions of ipc in this regard is also necessary.
section 279 makes rash driving or riding on a public way so as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person an offence and provides for punishment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to rs. 1000/-, or with both.
31.
causing death by negligence is an offence under section 304a.
it reads s.304a. - causing death by negligence.-- whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
32.
section 336 ipc says that whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to rs. 250/-, or with both.
33.
section 337 ipc reads as follows s. 337. - causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others.--whoever causes hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
34.
section 338 ipc is as under s. 338. - causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others. --whoever causes grievous hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 35.
in empress of india v. idu beg13, straight j., explained the meaning of criminal rashness and criminal negligence in the following words criminal rashness is hazarding a dangerous or wanton act with the knowledge that it is so, and that it may cause injury but without intention to cause injury, or knowledge that it will probably be caused.
the criminality lies in running the risk of doing such an act with recklessness or indifference as to the consequences.
criminal negligence is the gross and culpable neglect or failure to exercise that reasonable and proper care and precaution to guard against injury either to the public generally or to an individual in particular, which, having regard to all the circumstances out of which the charge has arisen, it was 13 1881 3 all 776 the imperative duty of the accused person to have adopted.
36.
the above meaning of criminal rashness and criminal negligence given by straight j. has been adopted consistently by this court.
37. insofar as section 304a ipc is concerned, it deals with death caused by doing any rash or negligent act where such death is caused neither intentionally nor with the knowledge that the act of the offender is likely to cause death.
the applicability of section 304a ipc is limited to rash or negligent acts which cause death but fall short of culpable homicide amounting to murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
an essential element to attract section 304a ipc is death caused due to rash or negligent act.
the three things which are required to be proved for an offence under section 304a are 1 death of human being 2 the accused caused the death and 3 the death was caused by the doing of a rash or negligent act, though it did not amount to culpable homicide of either description.
38.
like section 304a, sections 279, 336, 337 and 338 ipc are attracted for only the negligent or rash act.
39.
the scheme of sections 279, 304a, 336, 337 and 338 leaves no manner of doubt that these offences are punished because of the inherent danger of the acts specified therein irrespective of knowledge or intention to produce the result and irrespective of the result.
these sections make punishable the acts themselves which are likely to cause death or injury to human life.
the question is whether indictment of an accused under section 304 part ii and section 338 ipc can co-exist in a case of single rash or negligent act.
we think it can.
we do not think that two charges are mutually destructive.
if the act is done with the knowledge of the dangerous consequences which are likely to follow and if death is caused then not only that the punishment is for the act but also for the resulting homicide and a case may fall within section 299 or section 300 depending upon the mental state of the accused viz., as to whether the act was done with one kind of knowledge or the other or the intention.
knowledge is awareness on the part of the person concerned of the consequences of his act of omission or commission indicating his state of mind.
there may be knowledge of likely consequences without any intention.
criminal culpability is determined by referring to what a person with reasonable prudence would have known.
40.
rash or negligent driving on a public road with the knowledge of the dangerous character and the likely effect of the act and resulting in death may fall in the category of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
a person, doing an act of rash or negligent driving, if aware of a risk that a particular consequence is likely to result and that result occurs, may be held guilty not only of the act but also of the result.
as a matter of law - in view of the provisions of the ipc - the cases which fall within last clause of section 299 but not within clause fourthly of section 300 may cover the cases of rash or negligent act done with the knowledge of the likelihood of its dangerous consequences and may entail punishment under section 304 part ii ipc.
section 304a ipc takes out of its ambit the cases of death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act amounting to culpable homicide of either description.
41.
a person, responsible for a reckless or rash or negligent act that causes death which he had knowledge as a reasonable man that such act was dangerous enough to lead to some untoward thing and the death was likely to be caused, may be attributed with the knowledge of the consequence and may be fastened with culpability of homicide not amounting to murder and punishable under section 304 part ii ipc.
42.
there is no incongruity, if simultaneous with the offence under section 304 part ii, a person who has done an act so rashly or negligently endangering human life or the personal safety of the others and causes grievous hurt to any person is tried for the offence under section 338 ipc.
43.
in view of the above, in our opinion there is no impediment in law for an offender being charged for the offence under section 304 part ii ipc and also under sections 337 and 338 ipc.
the two charges under section 304 part ii ipc and section 338 ipc can legally co-exist in a case of single rash or negligent act where a rash or negligent act is done with the knowledge of likelihood of its dangerous consequences.
44.
by charging the appellant for the offence under section 304 part ii ipc and section 338 ipc - which is legally permissible - no prejudice has been caused to him.
the appellant was made fully aware of the charges against him and there is no failure of justice.
we are, therefore, unable to accept the submission of mr. u.u. lalit that by charging the appellant for the offences under section 304 part ii ipc and section 338 ipc for a rash or negligent act resulting in injuries to eight persons and at the same time committed with the knowledge resulting in death of seven persons, the appellant has been asked to face legally impermissible course.
45.
in prabhakaran vs. state of kerala14, this court was concerned with the appeal filed by a convict who was found guilty of the offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc.
in that case, the bus driven by the convict ran over a boy aged 10 years.
the prosecution case was that bus was being driven by the appellant therein at the enormous speed and although the passengers had cautioned the driver to stop as they had seen children crossing the road in a queue, the driver ran over the student on his head.
it was alleged that the driver had real intention to cause death of persons to whom harm may be caused on the bus hitting them.
he was charged with offence punishable under section 302 ipc.
the trial court found that no 14 2007 14 scc 269 intention had been proved in the case but at the same time the accused acted with the knowledge that it was likely to cause death, and, therefore, convicted the accused of culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under section 304 part ii ipc and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years and pay a fine of rs.15,000/- with a default sentence of imprisonment for three years.
the high court dismissed the appeal and the matter reached this court.
while observing that section 304a speaks of causing death by negligence and applies to rash and negligent acts and does not apply to cases where there is an intention to cause death or knowledge that the act will in all probability cause death and that section 304a only applies to cases in which without any such intention or knowledge death is caused by a rash and negligent act, on the factual scenario of the case, it was held that the appropriate conviction would be under section 304a ipc and not section 304 part ii ipc.
prabhakaran14 does not say in absolute terms that in no case of an automobile accident that results in death of a person due to rash and negligent act of the driver, the conviction can be maintained for the offence under section 304 part ii ipc even if such act rash or negligent was done with the knowledge that by such act of his, death was likely to be caused.
prabhakaran14 turned on its own facts.
each case obviously has to be decided on its own facts.
in a case where negligence or rashness is the cause of death and nothing more, section 304a may be attracted but where the rash or negligent act is preceded with the knowledge that such act is likely to cause death, section 304 part ii ipc may be attracted and if such a rash and negligent act is preceded by real intention on the part of the wrong doer to cause death, offence may be punishable under section 302 ipc.
re question ii 46.
on behalf of the appellant it was strenuously urged that the conviction of the appellant by the high court for the offence under section 304 part ii ipc rests solely on the premise that the appellant had knowledge that his reckless or negligent driving in a drunken condition could result in serious consequences of causing fatal accident .
it was submitted that neither in the charge framed against the appellant, the crux of the prosecution case that the appellant was in a drunken condition was stated nor incriminating evidences and circumstances relating to rashness or negligence of the accused in the drunken condition were put to him in the statement under section 313 of the code.
47.
it is a fact that no charge under section 185 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 and section 66 1 b of the bombay prohibition act, 1949 was framed against the appellant.
it is also a fact that in the charge framed against the appellant under section 304 part ii ipc, the words drunken condition are not stated and the charge reads on november 12, 2006 between 3.45 to 4.00 a.m.
he was driving the car bearing registration number mh-01-r-580 rashly and negligently with knowledge that people are sleeping on footpath and likely to cause death of those persons rammed over the footpath and thereby caused death of 8 persons who were sleeping on footpath on carter road, bandra west , mumbai and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304 part ii ipc.
the question is whether the omission of the words, in drunken condition after the words negligently and before the words with knowledge has caused any prejudice to the appellant.
48.
section 464 of the code reads as follows s.464.
- effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge.- 1 no finding sentence or order by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the opinion of the court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. 2 if the court of appeal, confirmation or revision is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned, it may- a in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed and that the trial be recommenced from the point immediately after the framing of the charge. b in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit provided that if the court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.
49.
the above provision has come up for consideration before this court on numerous occasions.
it is not necessary to refer to all these decisions.
reference to a later decision of this court in the case of anna reddy sambasiva reddy7 delivered by one of us r.m. lodha, j. shall suffice.
in paras 55-56 of the report in anna reddy sambasiva reddy7 it has been stated as follows 55.
in unmistakable terms, section 464 specifies that a finding or sentence of a court shall not be set aside merely on the ground that a charge was not framed or that charge was defective unless it has occasioned in prejudice.
because of a mere defect in language or in the narration or in form of the charge, the conviction would not be rendered bad if accused has not been adversely affected thereby.
if the ingredients of the section are obvious or implicit, conviction in regard thereto can be sustained irrespective of the fact that the said section has not been mentioned.
56.
a fair trial to the accused is a sine quo non in our criminal justice system but at the same time procedural law contained in the code of criminal procedure is designed to further the ends of justice and not to frustrate them by introduction of hyper- technicalities.
every case must depend on its own merits and no straightjacket formula can be applied the essential and important aspect to be kept in mind is has omission to frame a specific charge resulted in prejudice to the accused.
50.
in light of the above legal position, if the charge under section 304 part ii ipc framed against the appellant is seen, it would be clear that the ingredients of section 304 part ii ipc are implicit in that charge.
the omission of the words in drunken condition in the charge is not very material and, in any case, such omission has not at all resulted in prejudice to the appellant as he was fully aware of the prosecution evidence which consisted of drunken condition of the appellant at the time of incident.
51.
pw-1 is the doctor who examined the appellant immediately after the incident.
in his deposition he stated that he had taken the blood of the accused as he was found in drunken condition.
on behalf of the appellant pw-1 has been cross examined but there is no cross-examination of pw-1 on this aspect.
52.
it is a fact that evidence of pw-1, as noticed above, has not been put to the appellant in his statement under section 313 of the code but that pales into insignificance for want of cross examination of pw-1 in regard to his deposition that the appellant was found in drunken condition and his blood sample was taken.
53. ca report ex. 49 too has not been specifically put to the appellant at the time of his examination under section 313 of the code but it is pertinent to notice that pw-18 investigating officer deposed that he had forwarded blood sample of the accused and the bottle found in the car to the chemical analyzer ca on 14.11.2006 and 15.11.2006 respectively.
he further deposed that he collected the medical certificate from bhabha hospital and he had received the ca report ex. 49 .
pw-18 has also not been cross examined by the defence in respect of the above.
in the examination under section 313 of the code the following