--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal numbers 10182-10183 of 2016 slp c numbers 28959-28960 of 2015 tamil nadu generation and distribution appellant s corporation limited tangedco rep. by its chairman managing director and anr.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

etc. versus csepdi trishe consortium, rep. by its respondent s managing director anr.
with civil appeal numbers 10184-10185 of 2016 slp numbers 30098-30099 of 2015 j u d g m e n t dipak misra, j. leave granted.
2. the appellant, tamil nadu generation and distribution corporation ltd for short the corporation vide notification dated 06.05.2013 floated a tender for setting up of two units of 660 mw ennore sez supercricitcal thermal power project at ash dyke of nctps, chennai wherein four bidders including the respondents herein participated.
however, two bidders out of four were disqualified as they failed to meet the bid qualification requirements bqr as a result of which bids of consortium of trishe energy infrastructure services private limited csepdi and bharat heavy electrical ltd bhel were taken up for consideration.
prior to the opening of the price bid, csepdi and bhel submitted supplementary price bids on 05.02.2014.
price bids were opened on 05.02.2014 by the appellant in the presence of the representatives of the respondents, the qualified bidders.
3. the uncurtaining of facts would depict that the 1strespondent sent series of representations dated 16.06.2014, 17.06.2014, 01.07.2014 and 08.07.2014 to the appellant highlighting various aspects of the bid and the relevance of para viii of clause 29.0 of the instructions to bidders itb which also deals with the rejection of bids of the tenderer whose past performance vendor rating is not satisfactory.
since the appellant paid no heed to the request made by the respondent number1, it filed w.p. number 19247 of 2014 seeking issue of a writ of mandamus to direct the appellant to consider the representations and comply with tamil nadu transparency in tenders act, 1998 for short, the ttit act .
an undertaking was given before the learned single judge by the learned advocate general that post- bid representations submitted by the respondent number1 will be duly considered while finalizing the tenders and appropriate orders will be passed in accordance with the tender specifications and the ttit act and rules framed thereunder and in terms of the said undertaking, learned single judge vide order dated 31.07.2014 directed the appellant to consider and pass orders on the representations of the appellant herein after affording them an opportunity of personal hearing and directed that till such orders are passed, the tender should not be finalised.
4. being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant filed writ appeal w.a. number 1065 of 2014 before the division bench which, by judgment and order dated 19.08.2014, disposed of the writ appeal by modifying the order of the learned single judge only to the extent that affording of opportunity of personal hearing to the person was impermissible having not contemplated under the rules for short, the rules and further permitted the respondent number1 to submit additional documents raising all its objections and the appellant was directed to pass an order and communicate the same to the respondents, csepdi and bhel.
however, the division bench did not modify the direction of the learned single judge which was to the effect that till a decision was taken on representations of the 1st respondent, the bid shall not be finalised.
5. after the disposal of the writ appeal, the respondent number1 sent its representation on 25.08.2014 along with necessary documents which was rejected by the appellant vide its communication dated 27.09.2014.
the legal propriety of the said rejection was called in question by way of writ petition w.p. number 26762 of 2014 seeking quashment of the same and further restraining the owner from taking steps to finalise the tender.
during the hearing of the writ petition, a copy of letter dated 27.09.2014 awarding the contract to bhel, respondent number 2 herein, was brought on record.
it was mentioned therein with regard to price negotiation meetings with the respondent number 2.
the respondent number 1 sent a letter dated 1.10.2014 to the appellant, highlighting the arbitrariness, anomalies and inconsistencies in its reasoning and the mala-fide intent in the matter of evaluation of the bid submitted by it.
however, the appellant by letter dated 10.10.2014, informed the 1st respondent that the subject tender had been finalised and awarded to bhel.
6. the letter dated 27.9.2014 awarding the contract to respondent number 2 and letter dated 10.10.2014 were assailed by the respondent number1 by filing w.p. number 27529 of 2014 for annulments of the letters and further for issue of directions to the corporation to determine the award of the tender strictly in terms of the tender bid document and taking into account the bid of respondent number1 and that of bhel, the respondent number2 herein.
7. the learned single judge dismissed the writ petition primarily based on the perusal of notes in the files containing the consultant report dated 30.05.2014 and on that basis opined that the conduct of process of evaluation of the tenders did not appear to be arbitrary, capricious or unfair and that price bids of the bidders had been evaluated as per the parameters indicated in the tender notification by an independent consultant who was selected as per the board resolution that was within the knowledge of both the bidders.
the reasoning of the learned single judge basically hinged on the consultants report that had determined that the respondent number2 herein was l1 and, therefore, the decision of the corporation in treating bhel as l1 and awarding the contract was neither arbitrary nor malafide.
8. aggrieved by the order of the learned single judge, the respondent number1 preferred writ appeals before the division bench.
the division bench took note of the various pleas raised by the respondent number1 including violation of the statutory provisions, arbitrariness, adoption of unfair and non-transparent procedure, erroneous delineation of the consultants report by the learned single judge and non-consideration of public interest.
9. the corporation, in its turn, contended before the division bench that there was no violation of procedure and the award of the contract was not amenable to judicial review in the obtaining factual matrix and any interference would only delay the execution of the work.
it was also urged that tender accepting authority taa had accepted the lowest tender and negotiations were held only with lowest bidder that clause 25.4 of the instruction to bidders did not permit the bidder to change the substance of the bids after the bids were opened that though the respondent number1 had offered lower rate on interest, the original interest rate offered was not in accordance with tender terms, for as per clause 14.0 d 5 the rate of interest quoted should be fixed, whereas the csepdi had not specified the fixed rate of interest that there was no perversity or arbitrariness in the decision taken as per the terms of the tender, prevalent banking practice and the term sheet given by the lender that the consultant was appointed pursuant to the board resolution dated 28.01.2012 who participated in all pre-bid and post-bid meetings and the minutes had been signed by all the parties and the consultant and, therefore, csepdi was very much aware of appointment of the consultant and the role played by consultant could neither be criticised nor ignored.
10.
the 2nd respondent herein contended that respondent number1 lacked credibility to make any allegation against it that design was the core area of leader of the consortium and they have no experience in india insofar as supercritical thermal power projects are concerned and that the work was under progress and they had expended substantial amount.
11.
after hearing the rival contentions, the division bench placed reliance on jagdish mandal v. state of orissa1 and observed that the approach of the owner was unfair in the tendering process.
it further analysed the scheme of section 10 of the ttit act and held that the tender accepting authority taa has a role to cause objective evaluation of the tenders.
referring to section 10 6 of the ttit act, it held that the corporation had not complied with the said provision and it was a case of procedural impropriety, unfair approach and arbitrariness.
the appellate bench referred to the authority in star enterprises v. city and industrial development corporation of maharashtra limited2 and declined to accept the stand of the corporation by opining that reasons for rejection of 1st respondents representations could not be treated as reasons for rejection of its bid and hence, the decision making process was flawed and in breach of section 10 7 of the act.
it further held that in the tender bulletin, absence of reasons for acceptance of tender, no statement of evaluation of tenders and no comparative statement of tenders received and, decision thereon was in clear violation of the requirements of section 6 1 read with section 10 of the ttit act and rule 30 3 of the ttit rules.
on the interest component and commitment fee, the division bench held that the approach was wholly arbitrary and the intention was to oust the respondent number1, for the evaluation process adopted was meant to suit one and reject the other.
it further held that the process adopted and the decision taken by the owner was arbitrary, unfair, irrational, biased and mala fide and did not serve the larger public interest.
in view of the said analysis, the division bench allowed the appeals and directed the corporation to evaluate the price bid of the respondents in the light of its findings and taking into consideration all relevant parameters including the representations documents submitted by respondent number 1 and to record detailed reasons for the decision and communicate the same to the respondent number1 so as to comply with the requirement of the provisions of the ttit act and ttit rules and various decisions of this court.
12.
being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, the corporation and the successful bidder, by way of special leave, have preferred separate appeals.
13.
we have heard mr. mukul rohatgi, learned attorney general and mr. parag p. tripathi, learned senior counsel for the appellant-bhel and mr. subramonium prasad, learned senior counsel for the appellant-corporation, and mr. kapil sibal, learned senior counsel for respondent number1 and mr. sriram panchu, learned senior counsel for the respondent number 2. 14.
it is apposite to note that in course of hearing it has been opined that the singular issue that is required to be addressed is whether the evaluation report dated 30th may, 2014 by the consultant, is prima facie erroneous, requiring interference within the parameters of judicial review.
such a singular point was required to be focused as mr. mukul rohatgi, learned attorney general appearing for bhel and mr. subramonium prasad learned senior counsel appearing for the corporation had submitted as the subsequent offers either by bhel or by the 1st respondent need not be considered.
at that juncture, mr. kapil sibal learned senior counsel appearing for the 1st respondent, the contesting party, had submitted that the consultants report would graphically exposit that the respondent number1 was entitled to be declared as l-1 even if it is scrutinized within the limited parameters of the judicial review.
the court had directed for handing over the consultants report to the learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent.
in view of the aforesaid submission, the opinion expressed on other issues by the learned single judge or by the division bench need not be adverted to.
15. on a perusal of the facts brought on record, it is manifest that the corporation in its meeting held on 30.1.2014 had decided to open the price bids on both the bidders and thereafter the supplementary price bids were obtained from both the parties for the additional implications items in respect of technical deviation quoted by both parties and thereafter the price bids were opened on 05.2.2014.
as the factual matrix would reveal, the price bids were evaluated by the consultant.
the learned single judge has adverted to price evaluation report submitted by the consultant.
certain paragraphs from the report of the consultant that were reproduced by him are as follows- 4.0 evaluation 4.1 bhel bhel has arranged finance from m s. power finance corporation of india.
they are arranged to finance 75 of the total cost as debt at an interest rate of 12.25 p.a.
attached annexures 1 to 5 indicate the methodology adopted in calculating the various components required for evaluation like idc-debt, idc-equity, idc-uf fess, debt repayment schedule etc. 4.2 csepdi trishe csepdi-trishe has arranged finance from m s. icbc, china.
they have arranged a finance 85 of the total cost as debt at an interest rate of 7.2 p.a.
attached annexures 6 to 12 indicate the methodology adopted in calculating the various components required for evaluation like idc-debt, idc-equity, idc-uf fess, debt repayment schedule etc. 5.0 evaluated lower cost bhel csepdi-trish e all figures all figures in rs.
in rs. crores crores capacity 1320 mw 1320 mw a total epc cost 7762.977 9207.264 excluding vat b epc debt 75 5822.233 7826.174 c epc equity 25 1940.744 1381.090 d idc debt 12.25 1295.079 1228.378 e epc debt 7117.311 9054.552 including idc b d f upfront fees 8.925 801.180 including interest g total debt e 7126.237 9855.732 f h interest on 14 509.597 456.606 equity i total equity c 2450.341 1837.695 h j total project 9576.578 11693.427 cost g i k total cost per 7.255 8.859 mw l pv debt 7553.364 8464.318 m pv equity 2809.403 2106.984 n total pv 10362.767 10271.302 o pv cost per mw 7.851 7.781 p loading for 10.287 173.229 deficiency q total np 10373.054 10444.531 r evaluated bid 7.858 7.913 price per mw paragraphs 4.0 and 5.0 of the price evaluation report submitted by the consultant, which i have extracted above, show that the consultant took into account only the interest rate of 12.25 per annum for the debt component arranged by bhel from the power finance corporation of india.
the consultant did not take note of the reduced rate namely 12.15, subsequently offered by bhel, for arriving at the conclusion that the evaluated bid price of bhel was the lowest.
16.
there is no dispute that as per the price evaluation report by the consultant, the epc price of the respondent number 1 was rs.9207.264 crores and respondent number2 to whom the contract was awarded was rs.7762.977 crores.
thus, the difference between the two epc price is rs.1444.287 crores.
the 1st respondent disputed the price evaluation report by the consultant on the ground that it wrongly loaded the sum towards a the commitment fee, b interest on management fee during idc period and c interest of guarantee fee during idc period in its bid amount which had led to the evaluation of quoted financial charges with interest to rs.801.18 crores.
17.
as regards the commitment fee, learned counsel for the appellant submits that the contention of the respondent number1 that since commitment fee was the fee to be charged on the unutilised amount of the loan meaning thereby if the appellant failed to draw the loan amount as undertaken, then only the commitment fee would be charged and, therefore, the determination after addition of the same was without any rationale as the respondent number1 had quoted in the calculation sheet for financial cost in the supplementary bid commitment fee to the tune of rs.164.72 crores which was to be charged 1 p.a. on accrued drawals and if no commitment fee was required to be paid, the respondent number1 should have mentioned the same to be nil or zero.
to show that the commitment fee is a part of the financial charges, learned senior counsel has drawn our attention to clause 14 d 6 of the instruction to bidders under the tender, which reads as follows- 6.
financing charges all financing charges of any nomenclature relating to financing of the project including but not limited to finders fees, commitment fees, arrangement fees, management fees, up front fees, syndication fees, service charges, guarantee charges, other fees and taxes, if any should be clearly outlined in the financing term sheet.
no variation in financing charges is permitted during the tenor of loan.
3.37 financing cost means all financing charges of any nomenclature relating to financing of the project including but not limited to finders fees, arrangers fees, commitment fees, management fees, up front fees, syndication fees, service charges, guarantee charges, other fees and taxes, if any.
18. at this juncture we may also refer to clause 3.37 of section 2 that deals with the general terms and conditions of the contract.
it defines the financing cost as follows- financing cost means all financing charges of any nomenclature relating to financing of the project including but not limited to finders fees, arrangers fees, commitment fees, management fees, up front fees, syndication fees, service charges, guarantee charges, other fees and taxes, if any.
19.
clause 14 that deals with the conditions for a binding debt financing term sheet, which needs to be reproduced in entirety.
it reads as follows- 14.0 conditions for a binding debt financing term sheet bidder shall enter into a memorandum of understanding mou with the lender for the debt financing agreeing to provide financing for the project and making payments directly to the bidder based on bills certified by tangedco as per the terms of payment clause.
the mou shall be submitted by the bidder along with their offer for signing of the loan agreement.
the bidder shall be responsible for arranging the required financing and achieving financial closure of the project within 4 four months from the date of letter of intent loi .
a. the bidder and lender shall furnish a joint undertaking to fulfill the commitment made in the offer for debt financing arrangement from the lender subject to due diligence.
tangedco will furnish the following documents to the lender for processing of debt financing to the successful bidder.
1. profile of tangedco 2. audited balance sheet of tangedco for the last three financial years 3.
mou entered between tangedco mmtc for long term supply of coal of this project.
4. tariff order for sale of power.
5. copy of dpr b.
it shall be understood that the financing term sheet shall be based on preliminary appraisal of the project jointly by the bidder and the lender satisfying themselves on the project financial viability.
c. it shall be understood that the award of contract to the bidder is contingent upon successful financial closure based on the terms and conditions provided in the financing term sheet and in the event of the financial closure does not materialize due to reasons attributable to the bidder or the lender or in the event of withdrawal by the lender from the project, the bidder will forfeit the security deposit.
d. the term sheet should be full and complete with all material terms of financing including but not limited to 1. loan amount at least 75 of the total epc cost 100 of interest during construction and financing cost.
2. currency of loan inr usd euro or a combination thereof.
3. tenor of the loan from the date of first drawal of the loan upto 6 months from cod of the 1st or 2nd unit whichever is later and 15 years thereafter.
4. rate of interest.
5. fixed rate of interest till the entire tenor of the loan after taking into account the hedged cost.
6. financing charges all financing charges of any nomenclature relating to financing of the project including but not limited to finders fees, commitment fees, arrangement fees, management fees, up front fees, syndication fees, service charges, guarantee charges, other fees and taxes, if any should be clearly outlined in the financing term sheet.
no variation in financing charges is permitted during the tenor of loan.
7. terms and conditions for draw down schedule.
8. moratorium for repayment of installment, interest and financing charges all cash outflow obligation of tangedco towards repayment of installment, interest and financing charges should be in inr fully hedged for the entire tenure of the loan and the repayment will commence only after 6months from the date of cod of later unit.
9. repayment period 15 years post idc and moratorium in 60 equated quarterly installments 10.
project cash flows and installment repayments statement should be submitted and will form part of the financing proposal.
the bidder shall indicate draw down schedule of finance to match the supply and erection schedule of project activities.
11. equity requirements and related covenants.
12.
security against security the following can be made available by tangedco a. hypothecation of all 100 project assets b. government guarantee for the repayment of loan 13.
validity period of the term sheet will be co-terminus with the validity of the bid.
20.
the stand of the respondent as regards the interpretation of clause 14 d 6 is that it only outlines all fees, but it does not mean that every such fee is to be loaded for evaluating the bid to determine l1 and no commitment fee can be loaded for such evaluation.
it is also put forth that there can be no question of loading interest on commitment fee.
21.
as has been stated earlier, the issue pertaining to correctness of consultants report has to be adjudged and scrutinized within the scope of limited power of judicial review in the obtaining factual score.
the division bench in the impugned judgment has taken exception to the process adopted in the identification of l1.
it has referred to its order dated 19.8.2014 wherein the 1st respondent was granted the time to submit additional documents.
the impugned order takes note of the fact that at that point of time, the corporation had never averred that tender had been finalized.
it has referred to the earlier order of the division bench that representations were to be considered and till then the bid should not be finalized.
it has referred to the letter of the chairman-cum-managing director of the corporation dated 20.7.2014 and opined that it appears to be a misstatement of fact.
22.
be it stated that the division bench has posed two questions- i whether interest offered by appellant is vague and ii whether the reduction of interest from 7.2 to 6.2 should be accepted.
23.
while dealing with the said issue, the division bench has referred to the publication in the tender bulletin stating about the decision on tender- 1. name of the tender chief engineer civil projects environment, inviting officer, 3rd floor, npkrr maaligai, 144, anna salai, chennai 600 002.
2. a name of the project detail of purchase works establishment of coal based 2 x 660 mw ennore sez supercritical thermal power project in the ash dyke of existing nctps under single epc cum debt finance basis.
vayalurvillage, thiruvallur district, tamil nadu.
sl.
details tender value decision on tender no 1 m s. bharat 7840.087 out of four bids heavy crores received for this work electricals lender power and among the qualified limited, bhelfinance two bidders, negotiation house, corporation was called for held sirifort, newlimited with the lowest bidder delhi 110 rate of viz m s.bhel.
after 049 interest negotiation, tender 12.25 value of rs. 7788 crores, rate of interest 9716.5974 at 12.15 was accepted consortium ofcrores by the chief 2 central lender engineer projects and southern industrial order for acceptance of china commerce bank the tender issued vide electric of china this office issue power design rate of lr.no.ce p se m ee-10/e ms. trishe,interest 7.2file.
2x660mw ennore sez 668, minz usd rs. stpp d.no.60/dt.27.09.20 road, ughan, 59.26 at sbi 14 china 430 bill selling 071 rate finally, m s. bhel new delhi offered bid for rs. 7788 crores was accepted by the chief engineer projects chennai and order for acceptance of the tender was issued vide this officer lr.no.ce p se m ee-10/ e file.2x660mw ennore sez stpp d.no.60/dt. 27.09.2014.
24.
thereafter, the division bench has recorded as follows- 31.3 while it is the plea of the appellant that fixed rate of 7.2-7.5 per annum or libor floating rate has been quoted by them, it is the case of the learned advocate general that clause 12.1 of the instructions to bidders stated that interest is to be quoted at fixed rate and it is not subject to change, and since the interest quoted is variable, it is not possible to evaluate the bid.
31.4 it is seen from the records, that subsequently, based on a query from the first respondent, the appellant had confirmed that it would be fixed rate of interest at 7.2.
the same was also confirmed in the repayment schedule and the same rate of interest was taken into consideration by the consultant in his report dated 30.5.2014.
he did not find fault with the rate of interest.
it is to be noted that the term sheet was submitted during july, 2013 and tender was evaluated in the year 2014.
the contention of vagueness in rate of interest does not appeal to us.
when the consultants report dated 30.5.2014 is accepted by tangedco for the purpose of evaluation, it has to be accepted for all purposes, though we have reservation on the consultants report dated 30.5.2014.
there is, therefore, no vagueness in the rate of interest quoted at 7.2. 31.5 the second issue relates to the reduction of rate of interest.
it is not in dispute that various meetings were held between the appellant and the tangedco.
the learned advocate general states that the consultant was appointed based on the 21st board meeting on 28.1.2012 and the consultant participated in all pre-bid and post-bid meetings and minutes were signed by all parties, including bhel and the appellant.
he stated that the appellant was aware of the consultants appointment and his role.
this only fortifies the fact that there have been series of consultation between both the bidders.
the finding of the learned single judge that the appellant acted on inside information is demolished by the stand of the learned advocate general as above.
the insinuation has no basis.
31.6 coming to the issue of reduction of rate of interest, taking into consideration the prevailing market rate, the appellant offered to reduce the rate of interest from 7.2 to 6.2 on 5.6.2014, even prior to any form of litigation.
when such an offer was given by the appellant the tender was not accepted in terms of section 10 6 of the act.
to recapitulate, what has happened earlier is that the writ petition in w.p. number 19247 of 2014 was filed on 17.7.2014, subsequent to the offer made on 5.6.2014.
the first interim order was passed on 18.7.2014.
the second interim order was passed on 31.7.2014.
the division bench passed an order on 19.8.2014.
at that point of time, there was never a statement by the tangedco that l1 was identified and discussion was going on.
we have also clearly stated that the statement of the chairman-cum-managing director of tangedco that the representations of the appellant will be duly considered by the board of directors while finalizing the tender and appropriate orders will be passed strictly in accordance with the tender specifications and by following the provisions of ttit act and ttit rules.
31.7 therefore, the issue relating to reduction of rate of interest should have been considered.
this reasoning of ours is also based on the fact that we have clearly held that the third respondent could not be ascertained as l1 on 2.6.2014 as per the statement of tangedco or on 30.5.2014 as per the finding of the learned single judge.
once there is no identification of l1, tangedco is bound to consider the reduction in rate of interest of both the appellant in their offer dated 5.6.2014 and that of the third respondent dated 27.6.2014, reducing the rate of interest from 12.25 to 12.15.
31.8 even otherwise, by virtue of the power under clause 25.3 of the instructions to bidders, which states that the purchaser reserves the right to relax or waive any of the conditions of this specification in the best interests of the tangedco, the tangedco could have considered such reduced rate of interest offered by the appellant and the third respondent.
25.
with regard to commitment fee, the analysis of the division bench is worth referring to- it clearly states that commitment fee is only on the cancelled portion of the loan.
that apart, even as per the drawdown schedule, the fee is to be paid only if the loan amount is not drawn by the 18th, 30th and 42nd month.
moreover, the appellant in the letters dated 13.6.2014,16.6.2014 and 17.6.2014, clarified that commitment fee is only on the unused credit line and that there shall be no commitment fee if the loan amount is fully utilized as per the drawdown schedule.
all these representations sent by the appellant were not considered by tangedco, despite there being a specific direction by the division bench of this court to consider the same.
it is a clear case of arbitrariness in approach and intended to oust the appellant.
this act of the tangedco is nothing but a case of malafide in evaluation process to suit one and reject the other.
26.
while dealing with the consultants report, the division bench has proceeded to state thus- 33.3 even as per the consultants report the difference between the bid of the appellant and the third respondent is around rs.71 crores.
that being the case, if either the commitment fee of rs.156.184 crores or the interest on management fee and guarantee fee for the 36 month construction period is not loaded on the appellant, it will have a bearing on deciding which one of the two is the lowest bid.
assuming the consultants report is of any value, such report without considering the relevant material is of no use.
the approach to add these figures without taking note of the representations and additional particulars documents is, therefore, arbitrary and tainted in bias.
this is in violation of the division bench judgment as well as the orders of the learned single judge in the first round of litigation.
27.
and again- the financial implication in respect of two tenderers has been specified by the consultant.
the issue is what factors mean and how it impacts the bid.
we find that the repayment schedule submitted by the appellant with regard to interest on management fee and guarantee fee during idc period is an accepted document by the consultant.
if nothing more is to be paid beyond that and that is clarified in the course of representation in clear terms, we fail to understand as to how this amount could be included in the cost when there is no implication.
the consultant, as we have held, did not have the benefit of considering the representation and other documents on the financial implications in this issue.
his opinion is therefore not based on relevant document representation.
this we have held is not in conformity with the order of the learned single judge in the first round of litigation, which was confirmed by the division bench.
withholding such a factor and to obtain an evaluation from the consultant loading the bid of the appellant is clearly a case of bias.
it is an unreasonable approach and an unfair gesture which crumbles the spirit of transparent tender.
33.6 we, therefore, have no hesitation to hold that the first respondent had erroneously added interest on management fee and guarantee fee when there is none and there is no ambiguity or vagueness.
once the appellant has indicated in the representation, in clear terms, as to how it should be treated, in the light of the order of the division bench, which tangedco accepted to consider the bid of the appellant, the first respondent ought not to have loaded this amount on the basis of the consultants report.
in all fairness, the tender accepting authority of the first respondent should have excluded this amount, if both the bidders are to be treated on the touchstone of fairness and on the doctrine of level-playing field.
this becomes necessary because the entire tender is tested on the larger public interest, that is to say, the implementation of the project in a time bound manner where cost is another important factor to be considered in the decision making.
in a welfare state, public authority cannot decide arbitrarily to throw away such an offer which they agreed to consider in the course of judicial proceedings, which we have referred to above.
these factors, namely, adding interest on management fee and guarantee fee, have to be eschewed for the purpose of considering the bid of the appellant, otherwise, it will suff