--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal numbers 362-363 of 2010 shankar kisanrao khade appellant versus state of maharashtra respondent j u d g m e n t k.s. radhakrishnan, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

we are in these appeals concerned with a gruesome murder of a minor girl with intellectual disability moderate after subjecting her to series of acts of rape by a middle ager, who has now been sentenced to death by the high court of bombay.
2. appellant, shankar kisanrao khade accused number1 and his present wife mala shankar khade accused number2 were charge sheeted, for the offences punishable under sections 363, 366-a, 376, 302, 201 read with section 34 ipc, for having, in furtherance of their common intention, kidnapped a minor girl and accused number1 had committed rape on her several times and committed the murder by strangulation.
the additional sessions court in sessions case number 165/2006 convicted the first accused and sentenced him to death under section 302 ipc, subject to confirmation by the high court and was also awarded imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of rs.1,000/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for short ri for six months for offences under section 376 ipc, further seven years ri and to pay a fine of rs.500/- in default to suffer ri for three months under section 366-a ipc and five years ri and to pay a fine of rs.500/- in default to suffer ri for one month for offences punishable under section 363 ipc, read with section 304 ipc.
the second accused - his wife, was convicted for the offences punishable under section 363a read with section 34 ipc and sentenced to suffer ri for five years and to pay a fine of rs.500/- in default and to suffer ri for one month.
the accused number2 had already suffered the punishment, hence did not file any appeal against the order of the sessions judge.
the accused preferred criminal appeal number512 of 2007 before the high court and the court heard the appeal along with confirmation case number1 of 2007.
the high court dismissed the appeal and the reference made by the sessions court was accepted and the death sentence was confirmed.
appellant has preferred these two appeals against those orders.
3. the facts giving rise to these appeals are as follows the deceased, a minor girl, aged about 11 years was living with her grandmother pw-13 at gunwant khandare in gunwant maharaj sansthan at lakhnwadi.
on 20.7.2006, in the evening, both the accused came to sansthan and stayed there.
on seeing the minor girl the accused and his wife offered mango sweets.
on the morning of 21.07.2006 also the accused offered her sweets and attracted her attention.
at about 12.00 oclock on the same day, both the accused and his wife induced her to come with them and the girl accompanied them.
pw-13, the grandmother of the girl child was informed by some of the ladies residing in the neighbourhood that they saw the girl being taken away by the first accused towards the place called puja dhuni.
pw-13 met village madhan and informed him that fact and also to her son, ramesh pw-12 , but the girl could not be traced.
facts revealed that the girl was taken by the accused persons to a weekly market at paratwada and stayed there during night and the first accused had committed the act of rape on her and which was repeated at gayatri mandir at paratwada where they had stayed on 22.7.2006.
4. the accused persons then on 23.07.2006 took the girl to the house of one ravindra lavate pw-8 whom they know earlier.
pw8 and the son of the accused were friends.
on the date of incident, they stayed there.
the accused and the girl were sleeping in the verandah when pw-8 heard the cries of the minor girl and found the accused committing rape on her which was objected to by him and his wife.
the accused then took the girl on a bicycle in the field bearing number62 of shantaram jawarkar at about 9.00 pm.
and after committing rape strangulated and murdered her.
vinod jaswarkar pw 14 and sanjay pw 9 found the dead body of the minor girl from the field.
pw 9 approached the police station asegaon and submitted ext.48 report about the incident.
the investigating officer a.p.i.
baviskar pw18 went to the place of occurrence with the panchas and staff and noticed that the minor girl was raped and murdered.
the spot panchnama was prepared in the presence of the staff.
articles found at the spot were seized and ext.16 inquest panchnama was also prepared and dead body was sent for the post mortem.
dr. mohan kewade pw 3 conducted the post- mortem and submitted the report ext.
27 dated 25.07.2006. 5.
ramesh pw12 informed asegaon police station that his sisters daughter was missing since 21.7.2006 and her dead body was identified by him.
pw3, who conducted the post mortem, came to the conclusion that the deceased was raped and murdered and he had also opined that the deceased was subjected to carnal intercourse and the death was due to asphyxia due to strangulation.
devsingh baviskar, api pw18 recorded the statement of several witnesses and arrested the accused and his wife on 2.8.2006 and the charge sheet was filed before the judge, first class, chandur bazar who later committed the case to the court of sessions.
6. the prosecution examined 18 witnesses and relied upon several documents including the experts evidence.
no witness was examined on the side of the defence.
the sessions court found both the accused guilty and convicted the 1st accused and sentenced him with death penalty which was confirmed.
we are in these appeals primarily concerned with the question whether the death sentence awarded to shankar kisanrao khade is sustainable or not and whether the case falls under the category of rarest of rare cases warranting capital punishment.
7. we heard shri.
a.k. talesera, learned counsel appearing for the accused and ms.aprajita singh, learned counsel appearing for the state at length.
shri talesera submitted that the prosecution had failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that it was the accused who had committed the offence of rape and murder of the deceased girl.
he submitted that pw 8 is not a natural witness and his evidence inspires no confidence.
further, it was pointed out that there was delay in recording the statement of pw8 by the police and he was a planted witness.
learned counsel also pointed out that if pw 8 had witnessed the accused committing the crime, he would have informed the police at the earliest point of time.
learned counsel also pointed out that even though the wife of pw 8 was also present in the house, she was not examined as a witness.
further it was pointed out that, the test identification parade conducted also suffered from serious infirmities.
further it is also pointed out that there were material inconsistencies, contradictions and omissions which had seriously affected the prosecution version and that the important links in the chain of circumstances that it was the accused who had committed the crime were missing.
learned counsel submitted that in any view of the matter, the case would not fall under the rarest of rare category warranting capital punishment.
8. ms. aparjita singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondent- state submitted that the prosecution has succeeded in proving the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
learned counsel submitted that pw 8 is a natural witness and he had no motive or any enmity with the accused so as to rope him in the crime.
on the other hand his son and accuseds son were friends.
learned counsel submitted that the evidence adduced in this case proved beyond doubt that it was the accused who had kidnapped the minor girl and committed rape on her and later strangulated her to death.
learned counsel also submitted that the medical evidence clearly establishes that over and above the commission of the offence of rape, the accused had committed the offence of sodomy as well.
further it was pointed out that the accused was aged about 52 years and had committed the ghastly crime of rape on the girl aged between 11 to 12 years having moderate intellectual disability.
facts, according to the counsel, clearly indicate that the deceased was subjected to rape for more than one occasion and later strangulated her to death.
learned counsel placed reliance on an affidavit and submitted that the accused had previous history of committing various crimes.
reference was made to crime number18 of 2006, charged against the accused for committing the offence under sections 457 and 380 of ipc, which was registered at asegaon police station.
reference was also made to criminal case number264 of 2006 pending before the judicial magistrate, first class, chandurbazar.
further it was also pointed that the accused was arrayed as accused in sessions trial number52 of 2007 for offences punishable under section 302 ipc for committing the murder of one lady.
9. counsel appearing on either side placed reliance on a number of judgments of this court to bring home their respective contentions.
learned counsel appearing for the accused placed reliance on the judgments of this court in bachan singh v. state of punjab 1980 2 scc 684, mohd.
chaman vs. state nct of delhi 2001 2 scc 28, surendra pal shivbalakpal vs. state of gujarat 2005 3 scc 127, state of maharashtra v. mansingh 2005 3 scc 131 and state of rajasthan v. kashi ram 2006 12 scc 254.
10. learned counsel appearing for the prosecution placed reliance on the judgments of this court in gurmukh singh v. state of haryana 2009 15 scc 635, mohd.
farooq abdul gafur and others.
v. state of maharashtra 2010 14 scc 641, sushil murmu v. state of jharkhand 2004 2 sc 338, shivu and another v. registrar general, high court of karnataka and another 2007 4 scc 713, b.a. umesh v. registrar general, high court of karnataka 2011 3 scc 85, mohd.
mannan alias abdul mannan v. state of bihar 2011 5 scc 317, sebastian v. state of kerala 2010 1 scc 58, aloke nath dutta and others v. state of west bengal 2007 12 scc 230 and swamy shraddananda alias murali manohar mishra v. state of karnataka 2007 12 scc 288.
11.
i have critically and minutely gone through the evidence adduced by the prosecution as well as by the defence and examined whether the prosecution had succeeded in establishing the following circumstances to prove the charges levelled against the accused.
i the accused went to gunwant maharaj sansthan at lakhanwadi on 20.07.2006 and stayed there for one day along with accused number2 and on 21.7.2006 took the deceased to dhuni.
ii on 22.7.2006 accused took deceased to gayatri mandir.
iii on 23.7.2006 the accused along with his wife and deceased went to the house of ravindra lavate p.w.8 and stayed there.
iv on 23.7.2006 at night the accused committed rape on deceased.
v on 23.7.2006 during the night time the accused left on the bicycle with the deceased and on 24.7.2006 he came back to the house of pw8 to take his wife accused number2.
vi false explanation given by accused to pw8 that he had dropped the deceased at lakhanwadi.
vii on 24.7.2006 dead body of the deceased was found in the field of the father of sanjay jawarkar p.w.9 .
viii death of deceased was homicidal and that deceased was subjected to sexual intercourse on more than one occasion.
ix deceased was suffering from moderate intellectual disability.
x identification of the accused by the witnesses.
xi spot punchanama and discovery of articles at the instance of the accused.
12.
facts in this case indicate that the deceased was aged about 11 years on the date of the incident and was studying in the 4th standard.
on the age of the girl, there was some dispute.
certificate ext.94 issued by the handicap board stated the age of girl was 9 years on 6.12.2005.
post- mortem report ext.27 mentions her age as 14 years and the opinion of the medical officer ext.
29 shows that the approximate age of the deceased was about 14 years.
ramesh pw 12, the maternal uncle stated that her age was between 10-12 years.
pw 13 - grandmother of the deceased stated her age was about 10 years.
taking into consideration all the versions of the witnesses and the documents produced, it is safe to conclude that her age was around 11 years.
13.
pw 10, pw 11, pw 12 and pw 13 stated how the girl was taken from the house of pw 13 and travelled to difference places, including the mandir.
pw 10 who was present at gunwant maharaj sansthan had deposed that on 20.7.2006 at about 7.00 pm accused and his wife came to mandir and stayed in the hall of the mandir and one girl aged about 11 years was also with them.
pw 11, who was conducting the hotel business opposite to the mandir, stated that on 20.7.2006 at about 7.00pm one man and woman had come to his hotel and on the next day at about 1.00 pm they came with a girl aged about 10-11 years and went to the mandir and he identified both the accused persons in the court.
p.w. 12, the uncle of the deceased stated that on 23.7.2006 his mother had come to his house and informed that the deceased was missing.
further, a watchman of the mandir pw 16 had also deposed that he saw a lady and a man with the girl aged about 12 years coming come to the mandir.
another clinching evidence which conclusively proved that the girl was in the company of the accused and his wife was the evidence of pw 8.
pw 8 deposed that his son and santosh, son of the accused, were friends and he used to go to the house of the accused.
pw 8 deposed that, on 19.6.2006, the accused and his wife had stayed in his house stating that they had come to meet one of the relatives who had been admitted in a nearby hospital.
on 23.7.2006, again the accused along with his wife came to the house of pw 8 on a bicycle along with a minor girl who was wearing a white shirt and green skirt.
the accused and his wife requested that they be permitted to stay during night which pw 8 agreed.
the accused was sleeping in the verandah during night along with the girl.
pw 8 heard the girl weeping and became curious and when it was found that the accused was having sexual intercourse with the minor girl pw 8 asked the accused and his wife to leave the place.
accused then took away the girl on his bicycle leaving his wife in the house of pw8.
14.
the above facts would clearly establish that the girl was last seen with the accused.
pw8 evidence discloses that the girl and the accused were seen together at a point of time in proximity with the time and date of the commission of the offence.
last seen theory was successfully established by the prosecution beyond any reasonable doubt.
this court in state of u.p. v. satish 2005 3 scc 114 has held that the last seen theory comes into play where the time gap between the point of time when the accused and the deceased were seen last alive and when the deceased is found is so small that possibility of any person other than the accused being the author of the crime is impossible.
this test, in my view, is fully satisfied in the instant case.
reference may also be made to the judgment of this court in ramreddy rajesh khanna reddy and another v. state of andhara pradesh 2006 10 scc 172, kusuma ankama rao v. state of andhra pradesh 2008 13 scc 257 and manivel and others v. state of tamil nadu.
15.
pw8 stated on the next day of the incident that the accused came alone to his house without the girl and left the house along with his wife.
evidence of pw 8 is very crucial and there is nothing to show that he had any enmity or grudge against the accused so as to implicate him.
pw8 had no difficulty in identifying the accused since he knew them earlier.
16.
further, apart from the evidence of witnesses discussed above, another crucial evidence is the medical evidence.
pw 3, dr. mohan kewade, who had conducted the post-mortem on the dead body of the deceased, noticed the following external injuries i labia majora and minora swelled, tear of size two inch x inch over interior part of labia majora, extending to vagina present with clots of blood.
ii anal tear of size 1 inch x inch posteriorly present swelling of anal opening and dilation of anal opening about 2 inch ween.
iii bruises of size 3 cm x 2 cm over both side of neck present about three in number on each side.
iv bruise of size 2 cm x 2 cm over medial surface thigh and thigh folds present.
v perianal bruises of size 1 cm x 1cm about three in number present, probable age of injuries are about 2 to 3 days.
on internal examination he found following injuries i injuries over larynx trachea and bronchi evidence of fracture of upper two tracheal rings and larynx present.
ii organs of generation.
iii tear of cervix about 3 cm interiorly present with echoymetic.
17.
medical evidence clearly indicates that the cause of the death was asphyxia due to strangulation and though there was clear evidence of carnal intercourse, the accused was not charged for that offence.
on a close scrutiny of the evidence, it can safely be concluded that the deceased girl was subjected to the acts of rape for more than one occasion.
18.
i have extensively, critically and minutely gone through the evidence adduced in this case and i have no doubt in mind that it was the accused who had committed the crime.
the standard of proof required to convict a person on circumstantial evidence is well established by a series of judgments of this court.
the circumstances relied upon in support of the conviction must be fully established and the chain of evidence furnished by those circumstances must be complete so as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused.
the sessions court as well as the high court has correctly appreciated the evidence and documents adduced in this case and found that the guilt of the accused is proved beyond reasonable doubt with which we fully concur.
19.
the only question that now remains to be decided is whether this case falls in the category of rarest of rare cases, justifying capital punishment.
this court in several judgments has awarded capital punishment, where rape and murder have been committed on a minor girl, after striking a balance between the aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
several other factors like the young age of the accused, the possibility of reformation, lack of intention to murder consequent to rape etc. have also gone into the judicial mind.
20. in bachan singh supra , while determining the constitutional validity of the death penalty, this court also examined the sentencing procedure embodied in sub-section 3 of section 354 cr.p.c.
and held as follows while considering the question of sentence to be imposed for the offence of murder under section 302 of the penal code, the court must have regard to every relevant circumstance relating to the crime as well as the criminal.
if the court finds, but not otherwise, that the offence is of an exceptionally depraved and heinous character and constitutes, on account of its design and the manner of its execution, a source of grave danger to the society at large, the court may impose the death sentence.
21.
in machhi singh and others v. state of punjab 1983 3 scc 470 this court held that case fell in the category of rarest of rare cases calling for capital punishment since the victim of murder was an innocent child who could not have or had not provided even an excuse, much less a provocation for murder or the murder was committed in an extremely brutal, grotesque, diabolical, revolting or dastardly manner which arose intense and extreme indignation of the community.
the motivation of the perpetrator, the vulnerability of the victim, the enormity of the crime, the execution thereof are factors which normally weigh with the court in awarding the death sentence terming it as the rarest of the rare cases.
reference to few judgments of this court where death penalty has been awarded for rape and murder of minor girls and judgments, where it has been commuted may be apposite.
22.
death penalty awarded 1. nathu garam v. state of uttar pradesh 1979 3 scc 366 this court in that case upheld the death sentence awarded by the trial court, confirmed by the high court, for causing death of a 14 year old girl by a person aged 28 years after luring her into the house for committing criminal assault.
judgment was delivered prior to bachan singh supra , therefore, the mitigating circumstances concerning the criminal were not seen addressed.
stress was more on crime test.
2. jumman khan v. state of uttar pradesh 1991 1 scc 752 this court, in this case, was hearing a writ petition moved by a convict, not to extend the death sentence.
writ petition was dismissed after referring to the order passed by this court in s.l.p. criminal number 558 of 1986, confirming the death sentence, noticing the degree of criminality and the reprehensive and gruesome manner the crime was committed on a six year old child.
criminal test is not prima facie seen satisfied, but only the crime test.
3. dhananjoy chatterjee v. state of west bengal 1994 2 scc 220 this court dealt with a case of rape and murder of a young girl of about 18 years.
the court opined that a real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life is required to be kept in mind by courts while considering the confirmation of the sentence of death but a cold-blooded and pre-planned murder without any provocation, after committing rape on an innocent and defenceless young girl of 18 years exists in a rarest of rare cases which calls for no punishment other than capital punishment.
paras 14 and 15 of the judgment would indicate that this court was more on crime test, not on criminal test, which are extracted below 14.
in recent years, the rising crime rate-particularly violent crime against women has made the criminal sentencing by the courts a subject of concern.
today there are admitted disparities.
some criminals get very harsh sentences while many receive grossly different sentence for an essentially equivalent crime and a shockingly large number even go unpunished, thereby encouraging the criminal and in the ultimate making justice suffer by weakening the systems credibility.
of course, it is not possible to lay down any cut and dry formula relating to imposition of sentence but the object of sentencing should be to see that the crime does not go unpunished and the victim of crime as also the society has the satisfaction that justice has been done to it.
in imposing sentences, in the absence of specific legislation, judges must consider variety of factors and after considering all those factors and taking an over-all view of the situation, impose sentence which they consider to be an appropriate one.
aggravating factors cannot be ignored and similarly mitigating circumstances have also to be taken into consideration.
15. in our opinion, the measure of punishment in a given case must depend upon the atrocity of the crime the conduct of the criminal and the defenceless and unprotected state of the victim.
imposition of appropriate punishment is the manner in which the courts respond to the societys cry for justice against the criminals.
justice demands that courts should impose punishment fitting to the crime so that the courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime.
the courts must not only keep in view the rights of the criminal but also the rights of the victim of crime and the society at large while considering imposition of appropriate punishment.
prima facie, it is seen that criminal test has not been satisfied, since there was not much discussion on the mitigating circumstances to satisfy the criminal test.
4. laxman naik v. state of orissa 1994 3 scc 381 this court again confirmed the death sentence on an accused for the offence of rape followed by murder of 7 year old girl by her own uncle.
the court opined that the accused seems to have acted in a beastly manner.
after satisfying his lust, he thought that the victim might expose him for the commission of offence on her to her family members and others, the accused with a view to screen the evidence of the crime, put an end to the life of that innocent girl.
the court noticed how diabolically the accused had conceived his plan and brutally executed it in such a calculated cold blooded and brutal murder of a very tender age girl after committing rape on her which, according to the court, undoubtedly falls in the rarest of rare case attracting no punishment other than capital punishment.
in this case aggravating circumstances, that is, crime test is seen fully satisfied, but on mitigating circumstances criminal test , this court held as follows 26.
this brings us to the question of sentence to be imposed upon the appellant for the offences for which he has been found guilty by the two courts below as well as by us discussed above.
in this connection it may be pointed out that this court in the case of bachan singh v.state of punjab 1980 2 scc 684 1980 scc cri 580 while discussing the sentencing policy, also laid down norms indicating the area of imposition of death penalty taking into consideration the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the case and affirmed the view that the sentencing discretion is to be exercised judicially on well recognized principles, after balancing all the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the crime guided by the legislative policy discernible from the provision contained in sections253 2 and354 3 of the crpc.
in other words, the extreme penalty can be inflicted only in gravest cases of the extreme culpability and in making choice of the sentence, in addition to the circumstances of the offender also.
having regard to these principles with regard to the imposition of the extreme penalty it may be noticed that there are absolutely no mitigating circumstances in the present case.
on the contrary the facts of the case disclose only aggravating circumstances against the appellant which we have to some extent discussed above and at the risk of repetition shall deal with that again briefly.
27.
the hard facts of the present case are that the appellant laxman is the uncle of the deceased and almost occupied the status and position that of guardian.
consequently the victim who was aged about 7 years must have reposed complete confidence in the appellant must have believed in his bona fide also and it was on account of such a faith and belief that she acted upon the command of the appellant in accompanying him under the impression that she was being taken to her village unmindful of the pre-planned unholy designs of the appellant.
the victim was totally a helpless child there being no one to protect her in the desert where she was taken by the appellant misusing his confidence to fulfill his just.
it appears that the appellant had pre- planned to commit the crime by resorting to diabolical methods and it was with that object that he took the girl to a lonely place to execute his dastardly act.
both the tests crime test and criminal test, it is seen, have been satisfied against the accused for awarding capital punishment.
5. kamta tiwari v. state of m.p. 1996 6 scc 250 this court dealt with a case of rape followed by murder of a 7 year old girl.
evidence disclosed that the accused was close to the family of the father of the deceased and the deceased used to call him uncle.
this court noticed the closeness to the accused and the accused encouraged her to go to the grocery shop where the girl was kidnapped by him and was subjected to rape and later strangulated to death throwing the dead body in a well.
this court described the murder as gruesome and barbaric and pointed out that a person, who was in a position of a trust, had committed the crime and the motivation of the perpetrator, the vulnerability of the victim, the enormity of the crime, the execution thereof persuaded this court to hold that case as a rarest of rare cases where death sentence was warranted.
the court was following the guidelines laid down in machhi singh supra , held as follows 8.
taking an overall view of all the facts and circumstances of the instant case in the light of the above propositions we are of the firm opinion that the sentence of death should be maintained.
in vain we have searched for mitigating circumstances - but found aggravating circumstances aplenty.
the evidence on record clearly establishes that the appellant was close to the family of parmeshwar and the deceased and her siblings used to call him tiwari uncle.
obviously her closeness with the appellant encouraged her to go to his shop, which was near the saloon where she had gone for a haircut with her father and brother, and ask for some biscuits.
the appellant readily responded to the request by taking her to the nearby grocery shop of budhsen and handing over a packet of biscuits apparently as a prelude to his sinister design which unfolded in her kidnapping, brutal rape and gruesome murder - as the numerous injuries on her person testify and the finale was the dumping of her dead body in a well.
when an innocent hapless girl of 7 years was subjected to such barbaric treatment by a person who was in a position of her trust his culpability assumes the proportion of extreme depravity and arouses a sense of revulsion in the mind of the common man.
in fine, the motivation of the perpetrator, the vulnerability of the victim, the enormity of the crime, the execution thereof persuade us to hold that this is a rarest of rare cases where the sentence of death is eminently desirable not only to deter others from committing such atrocious crimes but also to give emphatic expression to societys a abhorrence of such crimes.
court was giving thrust on crime test rather than criminal test against the accused.
6. molai and another v. state of m.p. 1999 9 scc 581 a three-judge bench of this court justified death sentence in a case where a 16 year old girl, preparing for her tenth standard examination was raped and strangulated to death.
the court noticed the gruesome manner in which rape was committed and the way in which she was strangulated to death and the dead body was immersed in the septic tank.
on sentence, the court held as follows 36.
we have very carefully considered the contentions raised on behalf of the parties.
we have also gone through various decisions of this court relied upon by the parties in the courts below as well as before us and in our opinion the present case squarely falls in the category of one of the rarest of rare cases, and if this be so, the courts below have committed no error in awarding capital punishment to each of the accused.
it cannot be overlooked that naveen, a 16 year old girl, was preparing for her 10th examination at her house and suddenly both the accused took advantage of she being alone in the house and committed a most shameful act of rape.
the accused did not stop there but they strangulated her by using her under-garment and thereafter took her to the septic tank along with the cycle and caused injuries with a sharp edged weapon.
the accused did not even stop there but they exhibited the criminality in their conduct by throwing the dead body into the septic tank totally disregarding the respect for a human dead body.
learned counsel for the accused appellants could not point any mitigating circumstances from the record of the case to justify the reduction of sentence of either of the accused.
in a case of this nature, in our considered view, the capital punishment to both the accused is the only proper punishment and we see no reason to take a different view than the one taken by the courts below.
the three-judge bench, it is seen, has applied both the tests crime test as well as the criminal test and found that the case falls in the category of rarest of rare cases.
7. bantu v. state of uttar pradesh 2008 11 scc 113 this court confirmed death sentence in a case where a minor girl of 5 years was raped and murdered.
this court, following the principles laid down in bachan singh, pointed out that when the victim of the murder is an innocent child or a helpless woman or old or infirm person or a person vis- -vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position, or a public figure generally loved and respected by the community, it is a vital factor justifying award of capital punishment.
in this judgment also, this court stressed on drawing of a balance sheet of mitigating and aggravating circumstances, following the judgment in devender pal singh v. government of nct of delhi 2002 5 scc 234.
court was applying the balancing test, to award capital sentence.
8. shivaji dadya shankar alhat v. the state of maharashtra 2008 15 scc 269 this was a case where the accused, a married man having three children, was known to the family of the deceased.
the court noticed the horrendous manner in which the girl aged 9 years was don