--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner krishna bhimrao deshpande vs. respondent land tribunal, dharwad and ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

date of judgment03/11/1992 bench lalit mohan sharma and k. jayachandra reddy, jj. act constitution of india, 1950 article 252 read with schedule vii, list n entry 18- legislation by parliament requirement-central law on ceiling on urban immovable property in pursuance of resolution of state legislature state laws on other matters relating to the subject-matter of resolution-legality of.
constitution of india, 1950 article 252, schedule vii, list ii, entry 18-urban land ceiling and regulation act, 1976 and karnataka land reforms act as amended in 1974 object and application of- whether any conflict between the acts.
headnote in the year 1972 the karnataka legislature passed a resolution under article 252 of the constitution imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and the acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling is limit for public purposes and all the matters connected therewith shall be regulated in the state by parliament by law.
on 1.4.74 the karnataka land reforms amendment act was enacted and under the act the tenant of the land covered by the act was entitled to the grant of occupancy rights after making an application under the act.
the act came into force with effect from 2.1.85.
but for the purpose of grant of occupancy rights, 1.4.74 was the relevant date.
in the year 1975 the karnataka urban agglomeration ordinance was passed, whereunder all lands between the periphery of 8 k.ms. of the municipal limits of hubli dharwad were declared as urban agglomeration land.
the parliament passed the urban land ceiling and regulation act, 1976 for imposition of ceiling on urban properties and the ceiling act was made applicable to karnataka also in view of the resolution passed by the state government.
the lands involved in the present cases were covered by the development plan by the belgaum city town planning authority as per the master plan and they were included and declared as urban agglomeration in the city of hubli under the provisions of the ceiling act.
the owners of the agglomeration lands challenged the order of the land tribunal under the land reforms act conferring occupancy rights on the tenants before the high court.
they contended that the lands involved in the cases were within the purview of the ceiling act and therefore the provisions of the land reforms act had no application to such lands on the ground that the provisions of the ceiling act.
the writ petitions were dismissed by the high court.
the owners writ appeals were also dismissed by a common judgment by the division bench of the high court.
the division bench held that there was no conflict between the two enactments.
the judgment of the division bench was challenged in s.l.p. civil number 16041-42/88.
many of the similar writ petitions that were pending before the high court were transferred to the land reforms appellate tribunal.
the appellate tribunal dismissed the petitions by a common order following the judgment of the division bench of the high court.
several civil revision petitions filed by the land owners against the order of the appellate tribunal were dismissed by the high court.
some of the special leave petitions were filed against the order of the high court in the said civil revision petitions.
the petitioners-land owners contended that when in pursuance of the resolution of the state legislature passed under article 252 of the constitution the parliament legislated in respect of the topic covered by the resolution.
the parliamentary law repealed or superseded the existing state legislation on the topic and therefore such law could not be enforced thereafter and that vesting of tenanted land in the state and conferment of occupancy rights under the provisions of the state act directly fall under the subject of imposing ceiling on land holding and other matters incidental or ancillary to the main topic of imposing ceiling and therefore they were fully covered by the ceiling act passed by the parliament and the same superseded the state enactment in respect of such lands.
the respondents submitted that imposition of ceiling was a distinct and separately identifiable subject and the parliament was empowered to legislate that the power of the state to legislate in respect of the remaining part of the subject-matter was unaffected that when two distinct powers came into existence, vesting law making competence in the state and parliament, the pith and substance of the laws made by each of them had to be examined to see whether any one of them encroached the field set apart as falling within the competence of the other body that in any event the provisions of chapter iii of the karnataka land reforms act had nothing to do with the imposition of ceiling on the urban land and that conferring of occupancy rights etc. to the tenants under chapter iii of the karnataka land reforms act did not come under the category of the matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental to the imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property.
dismissing the special leave petitions, this court, held 1.01.
article 252 empowers the parliament to legislate for two or more states on any of the matters with respect of which the parliament has no power to make law except as provided under articles 249 and 250.
this power to legislate is vested in the parliament only if two or more state legislatures think it desirable to have a law enacted by parliament on such matters in list ii, i.e. with respect to which the parliament has no power to make law for the state.
the passing of the resolutions by the state legislatures is a condition precedent for vesting the parliament with such power.
339-c-d 1.02.
the scope of entry 18 is very wide and the land mentioned therein may be agricultural or non-agricultural and may be rural or urban.
the subject-matter carved out of entry 18 under the resolutions passed by the various state legislatures related to only urban immovable property and by virtue of the resolution the law that can be enacted by the parliament should be a law imposing a ceiling on such urban immovable property.
340-b, c 1.03.
from the resolution it is clear that the subject- matter that was resolved to be entrusted to the parliament was the one imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling.
this subject-matter is the topic that falls within entry 18 of list ii of schedule vii to the constitution and the subject-matter of entry 18 has been originally kept apart for the state legislature to make law and parliament had no competence in respect of those matters falling under the wide scope of entry 18. by virtue of this resolution a part of the area falling under entry 18 is transferred to the domain of parliament to make law relating to the matters within the transferred area.
339-g, h 341-a 2.01.
the primary object and the purpose of the urban land ceiling and regulation act, 1976 is to provide for the imposition of ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomeration and for acquisition of such lands in excess of the ceiling limit and to regulate the construction of buildings on such lands and for matters connected therewith.
340-h 341-a 2.02.
the karnataka land reforms act as amended in 1974 is a welfare legislation.
the object of the act was to have a uniform law in the state of karnataka relating to agrarian reforms, conferment of ownership on tenants, ceiling on land holdings and for certain other matters contained therein.
342-d 2.03.
in respect of imposing ceiling on the land under urban agglomeration the provisions of the ceiling act alone are applicable and to that extent the provisions of chapter iv of the karnataka land reforms act which also deal with the imposition of ceiling would not be applicable.
344-c 2.04.
the land in the instant case comes under the urban agglomeration the imposition of the ceiling should naturally be under the provisions of the urban ceiling act and not under the karnataka land reforms act.
344-b, c 2.05.
imposition of ceiling on urban land is a distinct and independent subject as compared to imposition of ceiling on owning or to hold agricultural land or any other kind of property which do not attract the urban ceiling act.
these are two distinct powers and therefore the law making competence can be in two different legislative bodies.
consequently it is difficult to hold that the provisions of chapter iii of the karnataka land reforms act are outside the legislative competence of the state legislature.
350-c, d 2.06.
the one topic that is transferred in the resolution passed under article 252 as distinct and separately identifiable and does not include the remaining topics under entry 18 in respect of which the state alone has the power to legislate.
351-d 2.07.
the legislative power of the state has to be reconciled with that of the parliament and that in their respective fields each is supreme.
even assuming that the state enactment has same effect on the subject-matter falling within the parliaments legislative competence that by itself will not render such law invalid or inoperative.
350-g-h 2.08.
there is no conflict between the ceiling act and the state act.
the imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property is an independent topic and cannot be construed as to nullify the other subject left in the domain of the state legislature under entry 18 inasmuch as imposition of ceiling is a distinct and separately identifiable subject and does not cover the other measures such as regulation of relationship of landlord and tenant in respect of which the state legislature has competence to legislate.
351-c-d 2.09.
there is a ceiling provision under section 45 2 of the karnataka land reforms act providing for computation of the area in respect of which the tenant may be granted occupancy rights.
but it is clear that ceiling on the area in this context is only for the purpose of section 45.
351-f 2.10.
provisions in the chapters ii, iii, v, vi to xi of the karnataka land reforms act deal with the conferment of occupancy rights on the respective tenants and they do not in any way conflict with the subject matter transferred to the parliament by the resolution passed under section 252.
351-e,f thumati venkaiah and others v. state of andhra pradesh and of others, 1980 4 scc 295 union of india and others v. valluri basavaiah chowdhary and others, 1979 3 scc 324 calcutta gas company proprietory limited v. state of west bengal and others, air 1962 sc 1044 and kannan devan hills produce company limited v. the state of kerala etc., air 1972 sc 2301 referred to.
judgment civil appellate jurisdiction special leave petition civil numbers 16041-42/88.
from the judgment and order dated 27.7.1988 of the karnataka high court in w.p.
no 9173/86 and w.a.
no 2707/85.
with slp c numbers 12258, 12254, 12260/90 8608/91 r.n. narasimhamurthy, s.s. javali, s.n. bhat and ravi p. wadhwani for the petitioners.
m.s. nesargi, r. jagannath goulay, m.k. dua, m. veerappa, k.h. nobin singh, s.k. kulkarni and surya kant for the respondents.
the following order of the court was delivered by k. jayachandra reddy, j. in all these special leave petitions the common question that arises for consideration is whether the provisions of the karnataka land reforms act, 1961 as amended in 1974 act for short cease to be applicable in all respects to the lands which came within the purview of the urban land ceiling and regulation act, 1976 ceiling act for short .
the lands involved in these matters are covered by the development plan by the belgaum city town planning authority as per the master plan for the said city and they are included and declared as urban agglomeration in the city of hubli under the provisions of the ceiling act.
in the year 1972 the karnataka legislature passed a resolution under article 252 of the constitution to the effect that imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and the acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling limit for public purposes and all the matters connected therewith shall be regulated in the state by parliament qby law.
the state legislature thus divested itself of the legislative competence to enact law in respect of subject-matter of the resolution.
on 1.4.74 the amended karnataka land reforms act was enacted and under the said act the tenant of the land covered by the act is entitled to the grant of occupancy rights after making an application under the act.
this act came into force with effect from 2.1.85.
but for the purpose of grant of occupancy rights 1.4.74 was the relevant date.
while so in the year 1975 the governor of karnataka passed the urban aggolmeration ordinance whereunder all lands between the periphery of 8 k.ms. of the municipal limits of hubli dharwad were declared as urban agglomeration land.
in the year 1976 the parliament passed the ceiling act for imposition of ceiling on urban properties and the act was made applicable to karnataka also in view of the resolution passed by the state government referred to above.
the order of the land tribunal under the act conferring occupancy rights on the tenants was challenged before the high court contending that the lands involved in these cases were within the purview of the ceiling act and therefore the provisions of the land reforms act had no application to such lands on the ground that the provisions of the state act were repugnant to the provisions of the central act namely the ceiling act.
the writ petition was dismissed by the high court.
the owners preferred writ appeals and they were also dismissed by a common judgment in writ appeal numbers 2707 and 2361/85 etc.
the division bench held that there is no conflict between the two enactment in certain respect i.e. atleast so far as the implementation of the provisions of chapter iii of the act are concerned and that provisions of this chapter of the act do not cease to apply to the agricultural lands coming within the meaning of urban agglomeration in the ceiling act.
the judgment of the division bench is challenged in s.l.p.
civil number 16041- 42/88.
many of the similar writ petitions that were pending before the high court were transferred to the land reforms appellate tribunal.
the appellate tribunal dismissed the petitions by a common order following the judgment of the division bench of the high court in writ appeal number2707/85 and connected matters.
several civil revisions petitions filed by the land owners against the order of the appellate tribunal were dismissed by the high court.
some of the special leave petitions are filed against the order of the high court in the said civil revision petitions.
therefore all these special leave petitions can be disposed of by a common order.
it was urged before us that the resolution of the state legislature passed under article 252 of the constitution shifted the topic covered by the resolution from list ii of schedule vii to the constitution and vested the competence to make the law in respect of the said topic in the parliament and that thereafter the state enactment ceased to have efficacy in respect of said topic.
alternatively it was urged that, when in pursuance of the resolution the parliament legislates in respect of the topic covered by the resolution, the parliamentary law, repeals or supersedes any existing state legislation on the topic and therefore such law cannot be enforced thereafter.
we shall first extract some of the relevant provisions of the constitution of india and the respective enactments.
article 246 of the constitution reads thus 246.
subject-matter of laws made by parliament and by the legislatures of states- l notwithstanding anything in clauses 2 and 3 , parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i in the seventh schedule in this constitution referred to as the union list . 2 xx xx xx 3 subject to clauses 1 and 2 , the legislature of any state has exclusive power to make laws for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list ii in the seventh schedule in this constitution referred to as the state list . 4 xx xx xx entry 18 in list ii namely the state list of the vii schedule to the constitution is in the following terms 18. land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents, transfer and alienation of agricultural land land improvement and agricultural loans colonization.
article 252 of the constitution reads thus 252.
power of parliament to legislate for two or more states by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other state- 1 if it appears to the legislatures of two or more states to be desirable that any of the matters with respect to which parliament has no power to make laws for the states except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such states by parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all the houses of the legislatures of those states, it shall be lawful for parliament to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any act so passed shall apply to such states and to any other state by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the house or, where there are two houses, by each of the houses of the legislature of that state. 2 any act so passed by parliament may be amended or repealed by an act of parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects any state to which it applics, be amended or repcaled by an act of the legislature of that state.
article 252 empowers the parliament to legislate for two or more states on any of the matters with respect of which the parliament has no power to make law except as provided under articles 249 and 250.
this power to legislate is vested in the parliament only if two or more state legislatures think it desirable to have a law enacted by parliament on such matters in list ii i.e. with respect to which the parliament has no power to make law for the state.
the passing of the resolutions by the state legislatures is a condition precedent for vesting the parliament with such power.
the relevant portion of the resolution passed by the state legislature under article 252 reads thus now, therefore, in pursuance of clause 1 of article 252 of the constitution, this assembly hereby resolves that the imposition of a ceiling on urban immovable property and f acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling and all matters connected therewith or ancillary and incidental thereto should be regulated in the state of karnataka by parliament by law.
the resolution states that the imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property and the acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling limit with a view to utilising such excess property for public purposes and all other matters connected therein or incidental thereto shall be regulated in this state by parliament by law.
the basic question that arises is what is the actual content of the subject-matter that was resolved to be entrusted to parliament by the state legislature under article 252 of the constitution.
from the resolution it is clear that the subject-matter that was resolved to be entrusted to the parliament was the one imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling.
it is true that this subject-matter is the topic that falls within entry 18 of list 11 of schedule vii to the constitution and the said subject-matter of entry 18 has been originally kept apart for the state legislature to make law and parliament had no competence in respect of those matters falling under the wide scope of entry 18.
now by virtue of this resolution a part of the area falling under entry 18 is transferred to the domain of parliament to make law relating to the matters within the transferred area.
the scope of entry 18 is very wide and the land mentioned therein may be agricultural or non-agricultural and may be rural or urban.
the subject-matter carved out of entry 18 under the resolutions passed by the various state legislatures related to only- urban immovable property and by virtue of the resolution the law that can be enacted by the parliament should be a law imposing a ceiling on such urban immovable property.
the learned counsel for the petitioners, however, urged that vesting of tenanted land in the state and conferment of occupancy rights under the provisions of the state act directly fall under the subject of imposing ceiling on and holding and other matters incidental or ancillary to the main topic of imposing ceiling and therefore they are fully covered by the ceiling act passed by the parliament and the same supersedes the state enactment in respect of this land.
the learned counsel appearing for the respondents on the contrary submitted that imposition of ceiling is a distinct and separately identifiable subject and is the power carved out of entry 18 and vested in the parliament to legislate and that the power of the state to legislate in respect of the remaining part of the subject-matter is unaffected and that when two distinct powers have come into existence, vesting law making competence in the state and parliament, the pith and substance of the laws made by each of them has to be examined to see whether any one of them encroaches the field set apart as falling within the competence of the other body.
the learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that in any event the provisions of chapter iii of the act have nothing to do with the imposition of ceiling on the urban land and that conferring of occupancy rights etc. to the tenants under chapter 111 of the act do not come under the category of the matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental to the imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property.
now we shall refer to the provisions of the urban ceiling act.
the statement of objects and reasons under preamble to the said act would show that the primary object and the purpose is to provide for the imposition of ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomeration and for acquisition of such lands in excess of the ceiling limit and to regulate the marwaha and others.
1974 1 scr 165 miss neelima shangla v. state of haryana and others, 1986 4 scc 268, or jitendra kumar and others v. state of punjab and others 1985 1 scr 899.
if we have regard to the above enunciation that a candidate who finds a place in the select list as a candidate selected for appointment to a civil post, does not acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed in such posting the absence of any specific rule entitling him for such appointment and he could be aggrieved by his non- appointment only when the administration does so either arbitrarily or for no bona fide reasons, it follows as a necessary concomitant that such candidate even if has a legitimate expectation of being appointed in such posts due to his name finding a place in the select list of candidates, cannot claim to have a right to be heard before such select list is cancelled for bona fide and valid reasons and not arbitrarily in the instant case, when the chandigarh administration which received the complaints about the unfair and injudicious manner in which select list of candidates for appointment as conductors in ctu was prepared by the selection board constituted for the purpose, found those complaints to be well founded on an enquiry got made in that regard, we are unable to find that the chandigarh administration had acted either arbitrarily or without bona fide and valid reasons in cancelling such 0dubious select list.
hence, the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondents as to the sustainability of the judgment of cat under appeal on the ground of non-affording of an opportunity of hearing to the respondents candidates in the select list is a misconceived one and is consequently rejected.
in the result, we allow this appeal, set aside the judgment under appeal, and reject the applications made by respondents before cat, chandigarh.
however, in the facts and circumstances of this appeal, we make no order as to costs.
g.n. appeal allowed.
food corporation of india v. kamdhenu cattle feed industries november 3, 1992 j.s. verma, yogeshwar dayal and n. venkatachala, jj. constitution of india, 1950 article 14-contractual transactions of state or its instrumentality-essential requisites-non-arbitrariness, fairness in action and due consideration of legitimate expectation-ignoring the highest bid- negotiations for higher offer and acceptance thereof-validity of.
administrative law doctrine of legitimate expectation-forms part of non arbitrariness and rule of law- to be determined in the larger public interest open to judicial review.
the appellant-corporation invited tenders for sale of stocks of damaged food-grains.
the respondents bid was the highest.
since the appellant was not satisfied about the adequacy of the amount offered even in the highest tender, it invited all the tenders to participate in the negotiations, instead of accepting the highest tender.
during the course of negotiations, the respondent refused to revise the rates in its offer.
on the basis of the highest bid made during the negotiations, the appellant disposed of the stocks of damaged foodgrains, rejecting the highest tenders.
the respondent, whose tender was the highest, challenged the decision of the appellants by filing a writ petition before the high court.
it was contended that the action of the appellant was arbitrary and hence violative of art.
14 of the constitution.
the high court accepted the contention and allowed the writ petition.
being aggrieved by the high courts decision the appellant-corporation preferred the present appeal.
it was contended on behalf of the appellant that there being no right in the person submitting the highest tender to claim acceptance thereof, and since all tenderers were given equal opportunity to participate in the negotiations and to revise the bid before acceptance, the action of the appellant was not arbitrary.
the respondent contended that since no cogent reasons were indicated for rejecting all the tenders and for deciding to dispose of the stock by negotiating with the tenderers for procuring a higher price, such a decision was arbitrary.
allowing the appeal, this court, held 1.1.
in contractual sphere as in all other state actions, the state and all its instrumentalities have to conform to article 14 of the constitution of which non- arbitrariness is a significant facet.
there is no unfettered discretion in public law.
a public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good.
this imposes the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is fairplay in action.
due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the state and its instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all state actions.
to satisfy this requirement of non-arbitrariness in a state action, it is necessary to consider and give due weight to the reasonable-or legitimate expectations of the persons likely to be affected by the decision or else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case.
the decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of arbitrariness.
rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but provides for control of its exercise by judicial review.
328-a-d 12.
the mere reasonable or legitimate expectation of a citizen, in such a situation, may not by itself be a distinct enforceable right, but failure to consider and give due weight to it may render the decision arbitrary, and this is how the requirement of due consideration of a legitimate expectation forms part of the principle of non- arbitrariness, a necessary concomitant of the rule of law.
every legitimate expectation is a relevant factor requiring due consideration in a fair decision making process.
whether the expectation of the claimant is reasonable or legitimate in the context is a question of fact in each case.
whenever the question arises, it is to be determined not according to the claimants perception but in larger public interest wherein other more important considerations may outweigh what would otherwise have been the legitimate expectation of the claimant.
a bona fide decision of the public authority reached in this manner would satisfy the requirement of non- arbitrariness and withstand judicial scrutiny.
328-e-g 2.1.
even though the highest tenderer can claim no right to have his tender accepted, there being a power while inviting tenders to reject all the tenders, yet that power cannot be exercised arbitrarily and must depend for its validity on the existence of cogent reasons for such action.
the object of inviting tenders for disposal of a commodity is to procure the highest price while giving equal opportunity to all the intending bidders to compete.
procuring the highest price for the commodity is undoubtedly in public interest since the amount so collected goes to the public fund.
accordingly, inadequacy of the price offered in the highest tender would be a cogent ground for negotiating with the tenderers giving them equal opportunity to revise their bids with a view to obtain the highest available price.
retaining the option to accept the highest tender, in case the negotiations do not yield a significantly higher offer would be fair to the tenderers besides protecting the public interest.
a procedure wherein resort is had to negotiations with the tenderers for obtaining a significantly higher bid during the period when the offers in the tenders remain open for acceptance and rejection of the tenders only in the event of a significant higher bid being obtained during negotiations would ordinarily satisfy this requirement.
this procedure involves giving due weight to the legitimate expectation of the highest bidder to have his tender accepted unless outbid by a higher offer, in which case acceptance of the highest offer within the time the offers remain open would be a reasonable exercise of power for public good.
329-e-h 330-a shanti vijay company etc.
v. princess fatima fouzia ors.
etc., 1980 i s.c.r.
459, relied on.
council of civil service unions and others v. minister for the civil service, 1985 a.c. 374 h.l. , and in re preston, 1985 a.c. 835 h.l. , referred to.
22.
in the instant case, the respondents highest tender was super seded only by a significantly higher bid made during the negotiations with all tenderers giving them equal opportunity to compete by revising their bids.
the fact that it was a significantly higher bid obtained by adopting the right course is sufficient to demonstrate that the action of the appellant satisfied the requirement of non-arbitrariness, and it was taken for the cogent reason of inadequacy of the price offered in the highest tender, which reason was evident to all tenderers invited to participate in the negotiations and to revise their bids.
the high court was in error in taking the contrary view.
330-d-e civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 4731 of 1992.
from the judgment and order dated 21.7.92 of the c.w.n.
7419 of 1992.
y.p. rao for the appellant.
ashok sen, h.l. aggarwal, and k.k. gupta np for the respondent.
the judgment of the court was delivered by verma, j. leave granted.
the appeal by special leave under article 136 of the constitution is against the judgment and order dated 21.7.92 by which the civil writ petition number 7419 of 1992 has been allowed by the punjab haryana high court directing the appellant food corporation of india to allot to the respondent the necessary stocks of damaged rich for which the tenders had been invited by the appellant, since the respondent was the highest bidder.
the appellant invited tenders for sale of stocks of damaged foodgrains in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the tender notice annexure a .
the tenders were required to be submitted upto 2.45 p.m. on 18.5.92 the tenders were to be opened on 18.5.92 at 3.00 p.m. and offers were to remain open for acceptance upto and inclusive of 17.7.92.
the respondent submitted its tender for a stock of damaged rice within the time specified, but the respondents tender was conditional and the full