--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

case number appeal crl.
975 of 2000 appeal crl.
956 of 2000 appeal crl.
966 of 2000 appeal crl.
1101 of 2000 petitioner jayawant dattatray suryarao vs. respondent shamkishore shamsharrma garikapatti date of judgment 05/11/2001 bench m.b. shah r.p.
sethi judgment and death reference case number1 of 2000.
state of maharashtra vs. subhashsingh shobhnathsingh thakur

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

j u d g m e n t shah, j. these appeals have been filed against the judgment and order dated 7.8.2000 passed in tada special case number31 of 1993 passed by the designated court for greater bombay at bombay.
by the impugned judgment and order, out of 24 accused, the designated court convicted a-6 subhashsingh shobhnathsingh thakur, a-2 jaywant dattatraya suryarao and a-7 shamkishor shamsharma garikapatti for the various offences as under - 1. a-6 subhashsingh shobhnathsingh thakur a under section 3 2 i of tada p act and is sentenced to death and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more b under section 120-b ipc and is sentenced to death c under section 3 2 ii of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more d under section 3 3 of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more e under section 5 of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a term of 10 years and to pay a fine of rs.100/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more f under section 6 of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a fine of rs.100/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more g under section 302 of indian penal code for causing the death of shailesh shankar haldankar and is sentenced to death and to pay a fine of rs.500/- only, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more h under section 302 of indian penal code for causing the death of police head constable c.g. javsen, b.no.18005 and is sentenced to death and to pay a fine of rs.500/- only, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more i under section 302 of indian penal code for causing the death of police constable k.b. bhanawat, buckle number22579 and is sentenced to death and to pay a fine of rs.500/- only, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month more j under section 307 read with 34 of indian penal code for attempting to commit the murder of pw9 police constable vijay krishna nagare, pw42 psi k.g. thakur, pw11 shankar ganpat sawant, pw54 shankar ramchandra jadhav and is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life k under section 27 of the arms act and is sentenced to death 2. a-2 jayawant dattatray suryarao a under section 3 4 of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month b under section 212 of ipc and is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month 3. a-7 shamkishor shamsharma garikapatti a under section 3 4 of the tada p act and is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of rs.500/- only, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month b under section 212 of indian penal code and is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month.
a-1 jahur ismile faki, a-3 mehaboobi aziz khan, a-4 anil amarnath sharma, a-8 ahmed mohmed yasin mansoori, a-9 jaiprakashsingh shivcharansingh bacchisingh and a-10 prasad ramakant khade were acquitted for the offences for which they were charged.
for a-11 to 24, it has been stated that some were shot dead during the trial and some were absconding.
therefore, the trial of the accused, present in the court, was separated.
against the said judgment and order a a-2, jayawant dattatray suryarao has preferred criminal appeal number975 of 2000 b a-6 subhashsingh shobhnathsingh thakur has preferred criminal appeal number966 of 2000 and as he was sentenced to death, there is death reference case number1 of 2000. c a-7 shamkishor shamsharma garikapatti has preferred criminal appeal number956 of 2000. d the state has preferred criminal appeal number1101 of 2000 against the acquittal of a-1 jahur ismile faki, a-3 mehaboobi aziz khan, a-4 anil amarnath sharma, a-8 ahmed mohmed yasin mansoori, a-9 jaiprakashsingh shivcharansingh bacchisingh and a-10 prasad ramakant khade.
it is the prosecution version that on 12.9.1992 at about 0320 hours the incident of shoot out took place in j.j. hospital campus at mumbai, which is a government hospital having occupancy of 1500 beds.
it is alleged that having made preparation, such as procuring sophisticated weapons like ak-47 rifles, pistols, revolvers, dynamites and hand-grenades and by firing the shots through the said weapons, accused have committed murder of 1 prisoner shailesh shankar haldankar, who was undergoing treatment in ward number18 in the said hospital 2 police head constable chaintaman gajanan javsen and 3 police constable kawalsingh baddu bhanawat.
the two policemen were on guard duty of prisoner shailesh shankar haldankar.
it is also alleged that they attempted to commit murder of six other persons including pw11 shankar ganapat sawant -- a patient undergoing treatment in ward number18, yunus mohamed dadarkar a relative of a patient, pw54 shankar ramchandra jadhav watchman on duty, pw9 constable on guard duty, vijay krishna nagare, pw42 psi thakur, the police officer on duty to exercise the supervision over the guard and a staff nurse smt.
chandrakala vithal vinde, who was on duty.
thus, it is alleged that all the accused have committed the offence punishable under sections 120-b of ipc read with 3 2 i , 3 2 ii , 3 3 , 3 4 , 5 and 6 of terrorist and disruptive activities prevention act, 1987 hereinafter referred to as the tada and section 302 read with section 34, in the alternative section 302 read with section 114, in the alternative read with sections 149, 307 read with section 34, in the alternative section 307 read with section 114, in the alternative section 307 read with section 149 of the indian penal code and section 27 read with section 5 of the arms act.
it is the prosecution case that in mumbai city, criminal gangs operate and they commit organized crime and recover large sum from industrialists, businessmen, professionals, hoteliers etc.
as khandani protection money .
it is also stated that sister of dawood ibrahim a gangster had married one ibrahim parkar who was man of confidence of dawood ibrahim.
ibrahim parkar was shot dead at his residence on 26.7.1992 in nagpada locality and an offence, under crime number589/93, under section 302 ipc was registered in that connection.
deceased shailesh haldankar was suspected to have pointed him out.
it is also alleged that the said shailesh haldankar was a person belonging to the gang of arun gawali, the arch rival of dawood ibrahim.
on the night between 30.8.1992 and 31.8.1992 shailesh haldankar, bipin shere, raju batata and santosh patil had fired shots at one masukh rawat in the kumbharwada locality and therefore the offence at crime number460/92 under section 307 ipc was registered against them and as such shailesh haldankar, bipin shere and raju batata were wanted accused in that crime.
on 2.9.1992 at about 8.00 a.m. or so, shailesh haldankar and bipin shere and their associate raju batata now deceased were noticed by some one in kumbharawada locality and the police was informed.
on information, police party chased them and noticing police party, they tried to scare away the police by brandishing the weapons i.e. the swords and choppers.
somehow or the other, the police succeeded in overpowering shailesh haldankar and bipin shere.
third person raju batata managed to escape in the melee.
at the same time, number of persons who had gathered there, on seeing the commotion man-handled shailesh haldankar and bipin shere.
the police successfully persuaded the members of the public to maintain peace and thereafter shailesh haldankar and bipin shere were removed to j.j. hospital for treatment of injuries sustained by them.
they were transferred to j.j. hospital and kept in ward number18 on the third floor.
a guard comprising of one head constable and two constables was posted on duty to prevent the escape of the prisoners.
it is the prosecution version that on 12.9.1992 at about 2.00 a.m.
pw42 psi thakur had gone for guard duty check at the j.j. hospital.
after checking guard of bipin shere, he went to ward number18 to check the guard of the prisoner shailesh haldankar.
in the said ward, shailesh haldankar and other patient pw10 siddiq ahmed amin were sleeping on cots.
police constable nagare pw9 was sitting on the stool between the cots.
head constable javsen and pc bhanawat were sitting on the very same cot on which shailesh haldankar was lying.
shailesh haldankar was handcuffed.
psi thakur went inside the cabin and sat on the said cot.
it is alleged that all the accused came from the room of absconding accused nazir jariwala by two fiat cars.
accused number8 ahmed mansoori and deceased sunil sawant went ahead on scooter.
they were followed by cars.
the blue car was in front and was occupied by accused number6 subhashsingh and others.
other car was occupied by other accused.
both the cars entered through the western side gate of j.j. hospital.
some accused took their position near the staircase and accused number6 and others went upstairs.
it is alleged that accused number6 made a show by catching the collar of absconding accused ravi sorte and played a hoax that he was the police man who had caught the criminal by uttering the words saale tumhare baki satthi dikhao.
pw54 shankar ramchandra jadhav, a watchman on duty, who was standing near the staircase in the main building in front of the lift at the ground, after noticing the weapons in the hands of accused, suspected that probably they might be the policemen.
however, when he attempted to go ahead to make an enquiry, a-10 khade caught him and threatened him that he should not move and at the same time accused number9 bacchisingh hit him by the revolver butt on his face.
it is stated that pw54 shankar jadhav fell down in semi- conscious state and re-gained consciousness later on when he was taken to casualty ward.
pw6 police constable anant more, an unarmed constable attached to police head quarter, thane, on 12.9.1992, was on guard duty in ward number18 of j.j. hospital because one of the accused, who was lodged in kalyan prison was admitted in that ward for treatment.
his duty hours were from 3.00 a.m. to 6.00 a.m., he noticed three persons duly armed entering the said ward at about 3.40 a.m. two of them were having ak-47 rifles.
he rushed to the southern side wall of the ward.
there was a door in that wall and the shots were being fired at that door itself and, therefore, he could not fire from his weapon in retaliation.
the prisoner whom they were guarding had taken shelter underneath the cot.
he went in left side room, wherein another prisoner was admitted, who was being guarded by a guard from mumbai and noticed that the accused and two policemen were lying in the pool of blood on the ground in the said room.
his statement was recorded by byculla police station staff.
it is also stated that the staff nurse ms. chandrakala vithal vinde was on duty in ward number18.
after the accused entered the said ward, all of a sudden pw42 psi thakur heard the words hands up, do not move, else we will kill you.
at that time, pw9 pc nagare attempted to close the door but it was not fully closed.
further, psi thakur heard four rounds having been fired on the door which was sought to be closed and noticed that a person was standing outside the door at a distance of 1-1/2 or 2 feets.
it is stated that psi thakur fired from the revolver and also saw one person having weapon like ak-47.
he went out from the southern side of the cabin.
at that time, deceased shailesh was uttering release me, they have come to kill me.
pw9 pc nagare and the other constables became alert.
psi thakur went out through the southern door of cabin and rushed towards the another door which connected the main ward to the eastern gallery of the ward number 18.
then he noticed that the person who was standing outside the western door was in the same position and one or two persons were there at a distance of about 7/8 feet behind that person.
he also noticed 3-4 other persons in the ward.
he fired one shot in the direction of the said person.
he fired one more shot and then receded through the very same door back to the veranda.
he receded in the southern veranda and when he was rushing towards the bath room through the verandah, he heard somebody saying udharse bhaga maro saleko meaning the person had run away by that side, kill the bastard.
before rushing towards the bath room he had closed the said southern door of the ward and no sooner the aforesaid utterances were heard, he noticed that a number of shots were fired on that door.
he went inside the bathroom.
pw9 pc nagare who had become alert and who had taken the position with the rifle in his hand noticed very same person whom he had seen inside the ward earlier coming towards the southern door of the cabin, therefore, he fired one shot through his rifle in his direction.
it is his say that before he could fire second round, the bullet which the said person had fired hit him on his right thigh.
therefore, he receded a little and fell down by the side of the cot.
thereafter, that person entered inside the room and fired shots indiscriminately towards shailesh haldankar.
hc javsen and pc bhanawat were also hit by those bullets.
at that time, he heard hue and cry in the ward.
because of the injury sustained on his thigh, he felt giddy.
pw9 pc nagare has identified the person who was seen by him in the ward, who had uttered the word hands-up, hilo mat nahi to maar dalenge, and who had entered the cabin and fired the shots at shailesh haldankar, hc javsen and pc bhanawat to be the accused number6 subhashsingh thakur.
other facts stated by the prosecution witnesses are not relevant and, therefore, they are not narrated.
after completion of the investigation, accused were tried for various offences and convicted as stated above.
relevant part of evidence to prove the story, the prosecution has relied upon confessional statements, evidence of injured witnesses and other corroborative evidence.
we would first refer to the relevant part of the confessional statements of a-2, a-6 and a-7 and thereafter other evidence led by the prosecution to connect the accused with the crime.
confessional statement of a-2 suryarao a-2 has disclosed that a-7 shamkishore was known to him since year 1988 and was frequently visiting his residence in shanti niketan society on lbs road, ghatkopar.
he had sold his motor car numbermp-09-d09634 to one sanjay shetty through a-7 in july, 1992.
it is further disclosed that his election to the post of president was not liked by his political rivals and the said rivals lost no time in mobilising a campaign against him for no confidence motion.
in the month of july, 1992 the news had appeared in the navashakti marathi daily that he had sent shamkishor garikapatti a-7 to the residence of r.c. patil pw61 president of thane district congress party to tell him to stop the campaign against him and that dawood ibrahim had telephoned to r.c. patil asking him to stop the campaign against him.
thereafter, he had issued a press-note denying these allegations.
on 2.9.1992 at the behest of a-7, a-2 accompanied with his wife priti and pw34 himmat raval had gone to seema holiday resort in car belonging to shri palsule, driven by driver halim pw62 .
he requested pappu kalani to ask r.c. patil pw61 to stop the campaign against him.
pappu kalani promised him to do the needful through his contacts and further told him that a-7 was the man of his confidence and he should help him.
next day, he contacted a-7 on phone and enquired with him as to whether he had received any message from pappu kalani.
then a-7 replied in negative and told him that he was doubtful whether pappu kalani had gone to delhi.
he further disclosed that on 12.9.1992 at 6.30 a.m., he got a telephone call from a-7 asking him to see him before 9.30 a.m. with an air-conditioned car.
at 8.45 a.m. again a-7 telephoned him.
thereafter, he accompanied by bodyguard pc laxman vishe pw12 left for bombay in the contessa car numbermh-04-a-1445 driven by pw17 shripad tambe.
when he reached at the residence of a-7 at ghatkopar, a-7 told him that early in the morning arun gavlis men had fired at his friend and he is to be taken for medical treatment to the hospital and he should make arrangements for his transportation.
a-7 asked him to use his official vehicle as it would be safer and he accepted the said suggestion.
thereafter, a-7 asked him to go to sagar hotel at nagpada where a person would meet him and take him to the injured and after meeting the said injured he should take the injured to goregaon in his official car.
a-7 also informed him that he has booked suite in a hotel in juhu where he could relax.
then, the car was driven to sagar hotel and from there with the assistance of a young muslim boy it was brought towards bombay central area in front of a chawl.
the said boy took him to the building where he saw one person with a bandage around his abdomen, having height of 56, slim built and a shallow complexion.
he met another person there who gave his name as dr. bansal.
subhashsingh thakur a-6 was also present there.
he was knowing a-6 because he met him twice before at the instance of a-7 at seema holiday resort owned by pappu kalani situated at varap village on kalyan murbad road.
he then enquired about the condition of the patient with dr. bansal.
the injured was brought to the contessa car by dr. bansal with the help of two other persons.
dr. bansal as well as the injured sat in the car along with him and then the car was driven to hotel centaur at juhu.
from there the car was taken to hotel holiday inn at juhu because there was none to receive them at hotel centaur.
he got down from the car alongwith his body guard p.c. vishe pw12 and asked driver tambe pw17 to take the injured to the hospital as per the directions of dr. bansal.
one person namely, vijay, met him there in the hotel holiday inn and told him that he was sent by a-7.
he led him and the police constable pw12 vishe to suite number315.
thereafter, vijay made telephone call and left the said room.
sometime thereafter, a-7 telephoned him and requested him to go back to bombay central where he had gone before.
at about 1.00 p.m. driver tambe returned from the hospital when he asked him as to whether he had left dr. bansal and the injured and he told him that he dropped them at goregaon.
thereafter, he and pw12 pc vishe sat in the car and at his behest driver tambe drove the car to hotel sagar where the very same muslim young boy who had helped him in the previous visit to lead to place, was waiting for them.
a-6 came down and sat by his side and then asked the driver to proceed towards the petrol pump situated opposite to j.j. hospital.
a-6 asked the driver to stop the car there telling that savtya was coming.
after a few minutes savtya came there and then a-6 asked him as to where he was going and he told him that he was going towards hotel holiday inn.
when the car reached near lido cinema in santacruz locality at about 2.30 p.m., a- 6 asked the driver to stop the car in front of a petrol pump and then a- 6 and sunil sawant got down and walked away.
when they were tavelling in the car, a-6 opened the zip of the airbag and showed him a stengun and four revolvers.
then they went to hotel holiday inn and he collected the keys of room number315 from the receptionist.
it is his further say that near the reception counter, he heard someone talking about the shoot out incident in j.j. hospital and he realised that he had helped the gangsters of dawood ibrahim in fleeing.
he became restless and returned to bhiwandi at 6.00 p.m. on 13.9.1992 at 10.00 a.m., he received a telephone call from a-7 and then he complained to him that he had unnecessarily put him in trouble but a- 7 got annoyed and threatened him and asked to keep quite on the issue and forget about it.
it is further stated that on 13.9.1992 at the instance of a-7, he met pappu kalani and a-7 at seema holiday resort and then pappu kalani told him that he should not tell anybody about the removing of the injured persons and others in his official car failing which he would finish him and his family.
on 14.9.1992 at about 9.00 a.m., when he was about to leave his residence, baba gabriel and one unknown person met him and informed him that a-7 had asked him to come at his residence with his official car.
at that time, a-7 also telephoned him and asked him in a threatening tone to bring the car otherwise his family would be butchered.
he got frightened and asked driver badruddin chimkar to get maruti 1000 car bearing numbermh-04-a-5353.
the bodyguard police constable was also with him.
a-7 then asked him to bring himmat raval, who was known to a-7 and he was also taken from his residence.
the car was then brought to the residence of a-7 at ghatkopar and then a-7 boarded the said car and it was brought to vile parle.
in a flat on the ground floor, he met a male person aged about 30/35 years.
himmat raval got down from the car and stayed behind and the said male person then boarded the said car and asked the driver to proceed towards pali hill side.
on reaching there, vijay who had met them earlier at hotel holiday inn came there.
he had come there in a white coloured maruti car alongwith 2/3 persons.
they were carrying their suit cases with them.
at about 2.00 p.m. at the behest of a-7, driver badruddin chimkar drove the car towards santacruz and when the car reached one locality, probably daulatnagar in santacruz area, a-7 asked him to stop the car and went in a multi-storey building.
he saw a-6 there with one more person.
a-6 sat in the car and a-7 asked to proceed towards manor.
at about 4.30 p.m., they stopped at sagar petrol pump on western express highway as asked by a-7.
in the meanwhile, two blue coloured maruti cars arrived there.
one of the cars bearing numbermp 09 d-9634 was identified by him and he saw satish rao, ms. meena rao and his friend himmat raval getting down from the car.
he also noticed other 5 to 6 persons getting down from another car.
he took a-7 aside and requested him to relieve him because he did not want to go ahead with them.
a-7 agreed to relieve him on the condition that he should give him maruti 1000 car bearing numbermh-04-a-5353 belonging to bhiwandi-nizampura municipal council with the policeman on duty.
he agreed to spare the said car without a policeman.
a-7 agreed and also gave him maruti car numbermp-09-d-9634 for their return.
he, his bodyguard and himmat rawal sat in the said car and came back to bhiwandi.
mr. and mrs. rao, a-6 subhashsingh, and others went ahead in the maruti 1000 motor car and the other vehicle.
on the same day, at 7.30 p.m., he returned to bhiwandi and left the motor car mp-09-d-9634 at the residence of himmat raval.
thereafter, he took another car of his friend mohan amre and visited kalava to see rajaram salvi, agripada leader.
he also met shri anand dighe, thane district shivsena chief.
on 15.9.1992 at about 1.30 hrs., he saw maruti car numbermh-04- a-5353 near pious high school.
he intercepted it and found it to be occupied by mr. satish rao and his wife mrs. meena rao, a-7 and driver badruddin chimkar.
he asked driver badruddin chimkar to come next day morning at 9.00 a.m. on the same day at 9.00 a.m.
a7 telephoned him and asked him for his car with the policeman to be sent at his residence but he refused to oblige him.
on 16.9.1992 at 9.00 a.m., a-7 telephoned him and informed him that he has done the job without his help probably the reference was for not providing the car with a policeman .
a-7 was rude on phone saying that he could do anything and nobody can stop him.
at that time, he got frightened and tore two pages from the logbook of contessa car bearing number mh-04-a-1445 regarding the entries of his movements on 12.9.1992.
thereafter, as instructed by him driver tambe pw-17 re-wrote the logbook.
the said two pages were kept by him at his residence and were recovered by the police at his instance on 16.10.1992.
it is his further say that on 19.9.1992, when he learnt that mumbai police had come to bhiwandi and were making inquiries of the motor car bearing numbermh-04-a-1445 and its driver, he got frightened and contacted a-7 on telephone and informed him accordingly.
a-7 advised him to send driver tambe out of bombay for 3/4 days and in the meantime he would try to subside the matter through the sources of pappu kalani.
he also advised him to make efforts to subside the matter through his sources.
thereafter, he paid an amount of rs.1000/- to driver tambe and sent him to a-7 at ghatkopar with his nephew bhimsen in his private white coloured ambassador car numbermas-300.
he also called smt.
tambe wife of pw17 tambe and paid her an amount of rs.500/- for domestic expenses and told her that her husband had gone out of bhiwandi and would return after 3-4 days.
finally, he was arrested on 21.9.1992.
confessional statement of a-6 a-6 subhashsingh thakur was arrested by delhi police in the last week of july, 1993 and that his statement was recorded on 6.11.1993.
in his confessional statement, he has narrated history of his anti social activities in detail.
for our purpose, it is necessary to refer to relevant part of shoot out incident at the j.j. hospital.
he stated that he murdered one paul patric newman, belonging to arun gavlis gang.
after the murder he started staying with sunil sawant at kathmandu, nepal.
during that period, he used to often come to delhi, gonda and bombay.
when he was in kathmandu, one kim bahadur thapa, a corporator who was his mentor was killed by members of chhota rajan gang.
to avenge the killing of kim bahadur thapa, he killed sanjay raggad, diwakar churi and one amar juker, all belonging to chhota rajan gang with the help of his associate brijeshsingh absconding accused and others.
it is his say that after previous involvement in murder cases, he was living at delhi with one brijeshsingh.
deceased sunil sawant suggested him that since number of days, they have not participated in any game and they should go to bombay.
thereafter, they came to bombay and started living in flat in queens view apartment near lido cinema at juhu owned by deceased manish gangaram lala.
on 11.9.1992 he was informed by sunil that in j.j. hospital the killer of brother-in-law of dawood ibrahim was admitted and he was required to be murdered.
sunil was taking instructions from dawood ibrahim by contacting him on telephone.
it is his say that sunil informed him that everything was set and when they would reach at the hospital, at the point of ak-47 rifle policemen should be asked to raise their hands and thereafter remove the bullets from their rifles and then go in the ward, finish the killers and return.
at about 1.00 or 1.30 a.m., sunil informed brijeshsingh to go along with some persons of nazir at j.j. hospital to find out the situation.
after one hour, he was informed that one police constable was on duty and it would be easy to carry out the work.
at about 3.30 a.m. on 12.9.1992, he alongwith other persons went to j.j. hospital.
he was having 9mm pistol with magazines.
others were also having loaded pistol or revolver.
pradhan and brijesh were also having ak-47 rifles with extra magazines.
they went in two fiat cars.
when they entered the gate, they saw one watchman was standing near the staircase.
najir and his man caught the colour of ravi sorte to make a show as if a policeman was taking an accused.
on seeing them, the policeman who was on guard duty closed the door for entry to the ward.
then brijeshsingh knocked the door but none opened.
at that time, he felt that there was no setting and, therefore, he asked brijeshsingh that they all should go back.
during that time, brijeshsingh fired three to four times from his ak-47 rifle on the closed door.
again he asked brijeshsingh to return.
meantime, someone else fired at them from the opposite door.
thereafter, they all moved towards the side from where they were fired.
during that time, policemen continued to fire towards them from one door or other and they also retaliated.
thereafter, brijeshsingh came towards him quickly and told that he has killed all the persons inside the ward and asked them to move from that place.
finally they reached at the house of najir jariwala.
there they found that pradhan was having bullet injury in his abdomen and ravi was injured on his hand.
they contacted chhota shakeel at dubai who gave them assurance for arranging a doctor and that he would be giving information to dawood.
after half an hour, dawood made call and informed that one doctor would be reaching shortly.
one doctor thereafter came and gave injections to pradhan and ravi.
doctor informed him that treatment to pradhan is not possible.
doctor also informed on telephone to chhota shakeel that pradhan is required to be operated.
chhota shakeel thereafter informed that he will send some other doctor.
another doctor came and told that operation of pradhan is required to be done urgently and he was not having operation accessory.
thereafter, he contacted kishore - a-7 for making some arrangement and informed him that pradhan has sustained bullet injury.
thereafter, a-7 informed that suryarao has left bhiwandi and would be reaching there within a short time.
when suryarao came alongwith najirs boy, he introduced himself to suryarao and told him that due to internal conflict one of his persons has sustained a bullet injury and was required to be taken to hospital immediately.
suryarao enquired where he was to be taken.
then he told suryarao to take him in hotel holiday inn where a boy named vijay would meet him to make further arrangement.
at about 12.00 noon he received telephone call from sunil that pradhan has reached hospital of dr. mohan gedam and vijay was present there and that in a short while the car would be going back to hotel holiday inn.
he telephoned suryarao a-2 in hotel holiday inn and asked him to bring back the car to the residence of najir jariwala.
suryarao agreed.
after sometime, suryarao came there alongwith brijeshsingh.
he asked brijeshsingh to leave alongwith one boy of najir and thereafter he sat in the car alongwith suryarao.
najirs boy took them near a petrol pump.
suryarao thereafter left the place and they left for the flat of manishlala.
on 14.9.1992, he informed kishore that he wanted to leave bombay and whether he could arrange car of suryarao.
finally, kishore was asked to come in the car of suryarao at bses guest house by 4.00 p.m. in the car of suryarao, they reached at sagar petrol pump, vasai.
it is his say that finally he reached to delhi and thereafter went to other places.
for the purpose of this appeal, other part of the statement is not required to be narrated.
confessional statement of a-7 a-7 has also revealed the detailed facts about the incident and that he was arrested on 18.7.1993 by delhi police.
it is his say that he is a resident of shanti niketan, ghatkopar w , bombay.
he is b.sc.
and that after graduation he started business of transportation of liquid chemicals.
in january, 1985 he was playing a cricket match at shell colony ground in the morning.
at about 10.30 a.m. or so, he noticed one person running across the ground and he was profusely bleeding.
while running, he collapsed on the ground.
he was identified as subhashsingh thakur accused number6 by mangesh more and mahboob kunji.
they took him to dr. lads hospital, dhar, bombay.
dr. lad examined him and removed bullet from his body and informed him that it was a police case.
he asked him to inform the police or remove the injured to government hospital, otherwise he would inform it to police.
he got frightened and left the hospital.
next day, he came to know that accused number6 had fired at police and in retaliation police had fired at him and he had sustained bullet injuries.
in the year 1987, subhashsi