--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner prem nath kaul vs. respondent the state of jammu kashmir date of judgment 02/03/1959 bench gajendragadkar, p.b. bench gajendragadkar, p.b. das, sudhi ranjan cj das, s.k. wanchoo, k.n. hidayatullah, m. citation 1959 air 749 1959 scr supl.
2 270 citator info r 1962 sc1737 11 rf 1972 sc1738 16 f 1973 sc 231 15 r 1976 sc1031 11 rf 1990 sc2072 44 act landed estate, abolition of-validity of enactment- legislative competency of yuvaraj karan singh-jammu and kashmir big landed estate abolition act, xvii of 2007.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

headnote this appeal challenged the validity of the jammu and kashmir big landed estate abolition act, xvii of 2007 which was enacted by yuvaraj karan singh on october 17, 1950, in exercise of the powers vested in him by s. 5 of the jammu and kashmir constitution act 14 of 1996 1930 and the final proclamation issued by maharaja hari singh on june 20, 1949, by which he entrusted all his powers and function to the yuvaraj.
the object of the act was to improve agricultural production by abolishing big landed estates and transferring land to the actual tillers of the soil.
the suit out of which the present appeal arises was brought by the appellant in a representative capacity for a declaration that the act was void, inoperative and ultra vires and that he was entitled to retain peaceful possession of his lands.
both the trial court as also the high court in appeal found against him and dismissed the suit.
hence this appeal by special leave.
the validity of the act was challenged mainly on the ground that yuvaraj karan singh had no authority to promulgate the act.
it was contended that i when maharaja hari singh conveyed his powers to the yuvaraj by his proclamation of june 20, 1949, he was himself a constitutional monarch and could convey no higher powers, 2 the said proclamation could not confer on the yuvaraj the powers specified therein, 3 the powers of the yuvaraj were substantially limited by his own proclamation issued on november 25, 1949, by which he sought to make applicable to his state the constitution of india, that was soon to be adopted by its constituent assembly, in so far as it was applicable, 4 as a result of the application of certain specified articles, including art.
370 of the constitution of india to the state of jammu kashmir, the yuvaraj became a constitutional monarch without any legislative authority or powers and 5 the decision of the constituent assembly of the state not to pay compensation was invalid since the assembly itself was not properly constituted.
held, that yuvaraj karan singh, when lie promulgated the act, had the power to do so and its validity was beyond question.
271 it was indisputable that prior to the passing of the independence act, 1947, maharaja hari singh like his predecessors, was an absolute monarch so far as the internal administration of his state was concerned.
section 3 of the regulation 1 of 1991 1934 issued by the maharaja not only preserved all his preexisting powers but also provided that his inherent right to make any regulation, proclamation or ordinance would remain unaffected.
the constitution act 14 of 1996 1939 promulgated by him did not alter the position.
sections 4 and 5 of that act preserved all the powers that he had under s. 3 of the regulation 1 of 1991 and s. 72 preserved his inherent powers so that he remained the same absolute monarch as he was before.
with the lapse of british paramountcy on the passing of the independence act, 1947, the maharaja continued to be the same absolute monarch, subject to the agreements saved by the proviso to s. 7 of the act, and in the eyes of international law could conceivably claim the status of an independent sovereign.
it was unreasonable to suggest that the provisions of the instrument of accession signed by the maharaja on october 25, 1947, affected his sovereignty, in view of cl.
6 thereof, which expressly recognised its continuance in and over his state.
there was no substance in the argument that as a result of his proclamation issued on march 5, 1948, which replaced the emergency administration by a popular interim government headed by sheik mohammad abdullah and constituted a council of ministers who were to function as a cabinet, the maharaja became a constitutional monarch.
the cabinet had still to function under the constitution act 14 of 1996 1939 under the overriding powers of the maharaja.
when the maharaja- on june 20, 1949, therefore, issued the proclamation authorising the yuvaraj to exercise all his powers, although for a temporary period, it placed the yuvaraj in the same position as his father till the proclamation was revoked.
the maharaja was himself an absolute monarch and there could be no question as to his power of delegation.
in re. delhi laws act, 1912, 1951 s.c.r. 747, referred to.
the proclamation issued by the yuvaraj on november 25, 1949, did not vary the constitutional position as it stood after the execution of the instrument of accession by the maharaja nor could it in any way affect the authority conferred on the yuvaraj by his father.
the contention that the application of certain specified articles of the indian constitution to the state by the constitution application to jammu and kashmir order c. o. 10 issued by the president on january 26, 1950, affected the sovereign powers of the yuvaraj was not correct.
neither the scheme of art.
370 nor the explanation to cl. 1 of that article contemplated that the maharaja was to be a constitutional ruler.
the temporary provisions of that article were 272 based on the assumption that the ultimate relationship between india and the state should be finally determined by the constituent assembly of the state itself.
so, that article could not, either expressly or by implication, be intended to limit the plenary legislative powers of the maharaja.
till the constituent assembly of the state, therefore, made its decision, the instrument of accession must hold the field.
the initial formal application of art.
385, which was sub- sequently deleted from the list of articles applied to the state, could not justify the conclusion that it had adversely affected the legislative powers of the yuvaraj.
there was no substance in the contention that the decision of the constituent assembly not to pay compensation was invalid as the assembly itself was not properly called or constituted.
there could be doubt that the yuvaraj was perfectly competent to issue the proclamation dated april 20, 1951 in variation of the maharajas, under which the assembly was ultimately constituted, and so the assembly was properly convened.
judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 152 of 1955.
appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated march 25, 1953, of the jammu and kashmir high court in civil first appeal number 4 of 2009.
n.c. chatterjee, gopi nath kunzru and naunit lal, for the appellants.
h.n. sanyal, additional solicitor general of india, jaswant singh, advocate general for the state of jammu and kashmir, r. h. dhebar and t. m. sen, for the respondent.
1959.
march 2. the judgment of the court was delivered by gajendragadkar, j.-this appeal by special leave arises from a suit filed by the appellant in a representative capacity civil suit number 4 of 2008 against the state of jammu kashmir praying for a declaration that the jammu kashmir big landed estate abolition act, xvii of 2007 hereinafter called the act is void, inoperative and ultra vires of yuvaraj karan singh who enacted it and for a further declaration that the appellant was entitled to retain the peaceful possession of his lands.
it appears that the validity of the act was similarly challenged by maghar singh by his suit filed on the original side of the high court of jammu kashmir civil suit number 59 of 2007 and mr. justice kilam who had heard the said suit had rejected the plaintiffs contentions and held that the act was valid.
when the appellant suit came for trial before the district court it was conceded on his behalf that the points raised by him against the validity of the act had been decided by mr. justice kilam and that, in view of the said decision, the appellant could not usefully urge anything more before the district court.
the learned district judge who was bound by the decision of mr. justice kilam applied it to the suit before him and held that the act was valid and that the appellant was not entitled to the two declarations claimed by him.
in the result the appellants suit was dismissed.
against this decree the appellant preferred an appeal in the high court of jammu kashmir civil appeal number 4 of 2009 .
maghar singh whose suit had been dismissed by mr. justice kilam had also preferred an appeal number 29 of 2008 before the high court.
the two appeals were heard together by a -division bench of the high court which held that the act was valid and that the appellants were not entitled to any declaration claimed by them.
both the appeals were accordingly dismissed.
against the decree passed by the high court dismissing his appeal the appellant applied to the high court for leave to appeal to this court.
the said application was, however, dismissed.
thereupon the appellant applied for, and obtained, special leave to appeal to this court.
in dealing with this appeal it is necessary to narrate in some detail the events which took place in kashmir and the constitutional changes which followed them in order to appreciate fully the background of the impugned legislation.
a clear understanding of this background will help us to deal with the appellants case in its proper perspective.
in 1925 maharaja hari singh succeeded maharaja pratap singh as the ruler of kashmir.
it appears that for some time prior to 1934 there was public agitation in kashmir for the establishment of responsible government.
presumably as a sequel to the said agitation maharaja hari singh issued regulation 1 of 1991 1934 .
the -regulation began with the statement of policy that it was the declared intention of the maharaja to provide for the association of his subjects in the matter of legislation and the administration of the state and that it was in pursuance of the said intention that the regulation was being promulgated.
this regulation consisted of 46 sections which dealt with the legislative, executive and judicial powers of the maharaja himself, referred to the subjects which should be reserved from the operation of the regulation, made provision for the constitution of the legislature of the state, conferred authority on the council to make rules for specified purposes and referred to other relevant and material topics.
it is relevant to refer to only two sections of this regulation.
section 3 provides that all powers legislative, executive and judicial in relation to the state and its government are hereby declared to be, and to have been always, inherent in and possessed and retained by his highness the maharaja of jammu kashmir and nothing contained in the regulation shall affect or be deemed to have affected the right and prerogative of his highness to make and pass regulations, proclamations and ordinances by virtue of his inherent power.
section 30 lays down that do measure shall be deemed to have been passed by the praja sabha until and unless his highness has signified his assent thereto.
the regulation leaves it to the absolute discretion of his highness whether to assent to such a measure or not.
five years later the maharaja promulgated the jammu kashmir constitution act 14 of 1996 1939 .
from the preamble to this constitution it appears that, before its promulgation, the maharaja had issued a proclamation on february 11, -1939, in which he had announced his decision as to the further steps to be taken to enable his subjects to make orderly progress in the direction of attaining the ideal of active co-operation between the executive and the legislature of the state in ministering to the maximum happiness of the people.
in accordance with this desire the text of the constitution contained in regulation 1 of 1991 was thoroughly overhauled and an attempt was made to bring the amended text into line with that of similar constitutions of its type.
this con- stitution is divided into six parts and includes 78 sections.
part 1 is introductory.
part 2 deals with the executive part 3 with the legislature part 4 with the judicature part 5 contains miscellaneous provisions and part 6 provides for repeal and saving and includes transitional provisions.
it is significant that s. 5 of this act, like s. 3 of the earlier regulation, recognises and preserves all the inherent powers of his highness, while s. 4 provides that the state was to be governed by and in the name of his highness, and all rights, authority and jurisdiction which appertain or are incidental to the government of the state are exercisable by his highness except in so far as may be otherwise provided by or under the act or as may be otherwise directed by his highness.
the other provisions of the act are all subject to the over- riding powers of his highness specifically preserved by s. 5. as we will point out later on, in substance the constitutional powers of the maharaja under the present act were exactly the same as those under the earlier act.
while the state of jammu kashmir was being governed by the maharaja and the second constitution as amended from time to time was in operation, political events were moving very fast in india and they culminated in the passing of the indian independence act, 1947.
under s. 7 1 b of this act the suzerainty of his majesty over the indian states lapsed and with it lapsed all treaties and agreements in force at the date of the passing of the act between his majesty and the rulers of the indian states, all obligations of his majesty existing at that date towards indian states or the rulers thereof, and all powers, rights, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by his majesty at that date in or in relation to indian states by treaty, grant, usage, sufferance or otherwise.
the proviso to the said section, however, prescribed that, notwithstanding anything in para. b , effect shall, as nearly as may be, continue to be given to the provisions of any such agreement as therein referred to in relation to the subjects enumerated in the proviso or other like matters until the provisions in question are denounced by the ruler of the indian state on the one hand or by the dominion or province concerned on the other hand, or are superseded by subsequent agreements.
thus, with the lapse of british paramountcy the state of jammu kashmir, like the other indian states, was theoretically free from the limitations imposed by the said paramountcy subject to the provisions of the proviso just mentioned.
on october 22, 1947, the tribal raiders invaded the territory of the state and this invasion presented a problem of unprecedented gravity before the maharaja.
with the progress of the invading raiders the safety of the state was itself in grave jeopardy and it appeared that, if the march of the invaders was not successfully resisted, they would soon knock at the doors of srinagar itself.
this act of aggression set in motion a chain of political events which ultimately changed the history and political constitution of kashmir with unexpected speed.
on october 25, 1947, the maharaja signed an instrument of accession with india which had then become an independent dominion.
by the first clause of the instrument the maharaja declared that he had acceded to the dominion of india with the intent that the governor-general of india, the dominion, legislature, the federal court and any other dominion authority established for the purpose of the dominion shall, by virtue of the instrument of accession, subject always to the terms thereof and for the purposes only of the dominion, exercise in relation to the state of jammu kashmir such functions as may be vested in them by or under the government of india act, 1935, as in force in the dominion of india on august 15, 1947.
we may usefully refer to some other relevant clauses of this instrument.
by el.
3 the maharaja agreed that the matters specified in the schedule attached to the instrument of accession were the matters with respect to which the dominion legislature may make laws for this state.
clause 5 provides that the instrument shall not be varied by any amendment of the government of india act, 1935, or of the indian independence act, 1947, unless such amendment is accepted by the maharaja by an instrument supplementary to the original instrument of accession.
by el. 7 it was agreed that the maharaja would not be deemed to be committed to the acceptance of any future constitution of india nor would his discretion be fettered to enter into agreements with the government of india under any such future constitution.
clause 8 is very important.
it says that nothing in the instrument affects the continuance of the maharajas sovereignty in and over his state, or, save as provided by or under the instrument, the exercise of any powers, authority and rights then enjoyed by him as ruler of the state, or the validity of any law then in force in the state.
the schedule attached to the instrument refers to four topics, defence, external affairs, communications and ancillary, and under these topics twenty matters have been serially enumerated as those in respect of which the dominion legislature had the power to make laws for the state.
thus, by the instrument of accession, the maharaja took the very important step of recognising the fact that his state was a part of the dominion of india.
meanwhile,, the invasion of the state had created tremendous popular fervour and patriotic feelings in resisting the act of aggression and this popular feeling inevitably tended to exercise pressure on the maharaja for introducing responsible and popular government in the state.
the maharaja tried to pacify the popular demand by issuing a proclamation on march 5, 1948.
by this proclamation he stated that in accordance with the traditions of his dynasty he had from time to time provided for increasing association of his people with the administration of the state with the object of realising the goal of full responsible government at as early a date as possible, and he added that he had noted with gratification and pride the progress made so far and the legitimate desire of his people for the immediate establishment of a fully democratic constitution based on adult franchise with a hereditary ruler from his dynasty as the constitutional head of an executive responsible to the legislature.
it appears that before this proclamation was issued the maharaja had already appointed sheikh mohammed abdullah who was then the popular leader of the people as the head of the emergency administration.
by the pro- clamation the maharaja replaced the emergency administration by a popular interim government and provided for its powers, duties and functions pending the formation of a fully democratic constitution.
clause 1 of the proclamation provides for the composition of the ministry, whereas by cl. 2 the prime minister and other ministers are required to function as a cabinet and act on the principle of joint responsibility.
a dewan appointed by the maharaja is to-be a member of the cabinet.
clause 4 provides that the council of ministers shall take appropriate steps, as soon as resto- ration of normal conditions has been completed, to convene a national assembly based on adult franchise having due regard to the principle that the number of representatives from each voting area should, as far as practicable, be proportionate to the population of that area.
clause 5 then lays down that the constitution to be framed by the national assembly shall provide adequate safeguards for the minorities and contain appropriate provisions guaranteeing freedom of conscience, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.
clause 6 states that when the work of framing the constitution is completed by the national assembly the constitution would be submitted through the council of ministers to the maharaja for his acceptance.
the proclamation ended with the expression of hope that the formation of a popular interim government and the inauguration in the near future of a fully democratic constitution would ensure the contentment, happiness and the moral and material advancement of the people of the state.
through under this proclamation a popular interim government was set up, the constitutional position still was that the popular government had theoretically to function under the constitution of 1939.
it appears that before the popular government was thus installed in office the maharaja had deputed four representatives of the state to represent the state in the constituent assembly called in the dominion of india to frame the constitution of india.
after the popular interim government began to function the political events in the state gathered momentum and the public began to clamour for the framing of a democratic constitution at an early date.
when the atmosphere in the state was thus surcharged, the maharaja issued his final proclamation on june 20, 1949, by which he entrusted to yuvaraj karan singh bahadur all his powers and functions in regard to the government of the state because he had decided for reasons of health to leave the state for a temporary period.
now therefore i hereby direct and declare , says the proclamation, all powers and functions whether legislative, executive or judicial which are exercisable by me in relation to the state and its government including in particular my right and prerogative of making laws, of issuing proclamations, orders and ordinances, or remitting, commuting or reducing sentences and of pardoning offenders, shall, during the period of my absence from the state, be exercisable by yuvaraj karan singh bahadur .
as subsequent events show this was the last official act of the maharaja before he left the state.
after yuvaraj karan singh took the maharajas place and began to function under the powers assigned to him by the said proclamation, the interim popular government installed earlier was functioning as before.
on november 25, 1949, yuvaraj karan singh issued a proclamation by which he declared and directed that the constitution of india shortly to be adopted by the constituent assembly of india shall, in so far as it is applicable to the state of jammu kashmir, govern the constitutional relationship between the state and the contemplated union of india and shall be enforced in the state by him, his heirs and successors in accordance with the tenor of its provisions.
he also declared that the provisions of the said constitution shall, as from the date of its commencement, supersede and abrogate all other constitutional provisions inconsistent therewith which were then in force in the state.
the preamble to this proclamation shows that it was based on the conviction that the best interests of the state required that the constitutional relationship established between the state and the dominion of india should be continued as be- tween the state and the contemplated union of india and it refers to the fact that the constituent assembly of india which had framed the constitution of india included the duly appointed representatives of the state and that the said constitution provided a suitable basis to continue the constitutional relationship between the state and the contemplated union of india.
on january 26, 1950, the constitution of india came into force.
this proclamation was followed by the constitution application to jammu kashmir order, 1950 c. o. 10 which was issued on january 26, 1950, by the president in consultation with the government of jammu kashmir and in exercise of the powers conferred by cl. 1 of art.
370 of the constitution.
it came into force at once.
clause 2 of this order provides that for the purposes of sub-cl. i of art.
370 of the constitution, the matters specified in the first schedule to the order correspond to matters specified in the instrument of accession governing the accession of the state of jammu kashmir to the dominion of india as the matters with regard to which the dominion legislature may make laws for that state and accordingly the power of parliament to make laws for that state shall be limited to the matters specified in the said first schedule.
clause 3 provides that, in addition to the provisions of art.
1 and art.
370 of the constitution the only other provisions of the constitution which shall apply to the state of jammu kashmir shall be those specified in the second schedule to the order and shall so apply subject to the exceptions and modifications specified in the said schedule.
the first schedule to the order specified 96 items occurring in the union list while the second schedule set out the articles of the constitution made applicable to the state together with the exceptions and modifications.
later on we will have occasion to refer to some of these articles on which the appellant has relied.
it appears that, after the interim popular government took office, the revenue minister made a statement of policy at a meeting of the special staff of revenue officers held in the governors office on august 13, 1950.
the minister stated that whatever the difficulties, the cabinet was determined to go ahead and transfer the proprietorship of the land to the tiller.
the main idea underlying the proposed agricultural reform was that a land-lord shall not possess more than 20 acres of agricultural land.
in addition, he would be allowed 8 kanals for his use and sagzar and 4 kanals for his second house if in existence, and 10 kanals for bedzar or safedzar.
it was contemplated that a committee would be appointed to settle the details and other matters incidental to the said agricultural plan.
it was presumably in pursuance of this plan adopted by the interim cabinet that the act was promulgated by yuvaraj karan singh on october 17, 1950.
the preamble to the act shows that it was promulgated because no lasting improvement in agricultural production and efficiency was possible without the removal of the intermediaries between the tiller of the soil and the state, and so for the purpose of improving agricultural production, it was expedient to provide for the abolition of such proprietors as own big landed estates and to transfer the land held by them to the actual tiller.
the yuvaraj enacted the law in exercise of the -powers vested in him under s. of the.
constitution act of 1996 and theproclamation issued by maharaja hari singh on june 20, 1949.
the act consists of 47 sections and purports to, carry out its policy of improving the agricultural production of the state by providing for the extinction of the proprietors titles and the transfer of the lands to the tillers, and by setting up a self-contained machinery for the carry ing out of the scheme of the act and for settlement of all incidental disputes arising thereunder.
for the purpose of this appeal, however, it is necessary to refer to a few relevant sections which deal with the broad features of the extinction of the proprietors rights and the transfer of lands to the tillers.
s. 2 of the act inter alia defines land, proprietor and tiller, while s. 3 excludes certain specified lands from the operation of the act.
section 4, sub-s. 1 provides for the extinction of the right of ownership in certain lands and it lays down that not withstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the right of ownership held by a proprietor in land other than the land mentioned in sub-s. 2 shall, subject to the other provisions of the act, extinguish and cease to vest in him from the date the act comes into force.
sub-section 2 of s. 4 enumerates lands which are excluded from the operation of sub-s. 1 .
they are a units of land not exceeding 182 kanals including residential sites, bedzars and safedzars, b kahikrishmi areas, araks, kaps and unculturable wastes including those used for raising fuel or fodder, and c orchards.
the proviso to sub-s. 2 gives government the power to dispose of lands mentioned in cl. b in such a manner as may be recommended by the committee to be set up for that purpose.
section 26 of the act deals with the question of payment to the proprietors.
it provides that there shall, until the constituent assembly of the state settles the question of compensation, with respect to the land expropriated under this act, be paid by the government to every proprietor who has been expropriated, an annuity in the manner indicated in the section.
in other words, subject to the final decision of the constituent assembly, s. 26 contemplates the payment of annuity to the expropriated proprietors according to the scale prescribed in the section.
with the rest of the sections we are not concerned in the present appeal.
after the act was enacted by the yuvaraj he issued a proclamation on april 20, 1951, directing that a constituent assembly consisting of representatives of the people elected on the basis of adult franchise shall be constituted forthwith for the purpose of framing a constitution for the state of jammu kashmir.
the proclamation sets out the manner in which members of the said constituent assembly would be elected and makes provisions for the holding of the said elections.
it also authorised the constituent assembly to frame its own agenda and make rules for regulating its procedure and the conduct of its business.
the preamble to this proclamation shows that the yuvaraj was satisfied that it was the general desire of the people that a constituent assembly should be brought into being for the purpose of framing a constitution for the state and that it was commonly felt that the convening of the said assembly could no longer be delayed without detriment to the future well- being of the state.
the yuvaraj also felt no doubt that the proclamation issued by the maharaja on march 5, 1948, in regard to the convening of the national assembly as per cls.
4 to 6 no longer met the requirements of the situation in the state.
thus this proclamation was intended to meet expeditiously the popular demand for the framing of a democratic constitution and it indicates that a decisive stage bad been reached in the political history of the state.
in accordance with this proclamation a constituent assembly was elected and it framed the constitution for the state.
by the constitution thus framed the hereditary rule of the state was abolished, and a provision was made for the election of a sadar-i-riyasat to be at the head of the state.
on november 13, 1952, the yuvaraj was elected to the office of the sadar-i-riyasat and with his election the dynastic rule of maharaja hari singh came to an end.
on november 15, 1952, the constitution application to jammu kashmir second amendment order, 1952 c. o. 43 was issued and it came into force on november 17, 1952.
by this order the earlier order of 1950 was amended as a result of which all references in the said order to the rajpramukh shall be construed as references to the sadar-i-riyasat of jammu kashmir.
similarly in the second schedule to the said order some amendments were made.
on the ,same day a declaration c. o. 44 was made by the president under art.
370, sub- art. 3 of the constitution that from november 17, 1952, the said art.
370 shall be operative with the modification that for the explanation in el. 1 thereof the new explanation shall be substituted.
the effect of this new explanation was that the government of the state meant the person for the time being recognised by the president, on the recommendation of the legislative assembly of the state, as the sadar-i- riyasat of jammu kashmir acting on the advice of the council of ministers of the state for the time being in force.
on november 18, 1952, yuvaraj karan singh was recognised as the sadar-i-riyasat of jammu kashmir.
on may 14, 1954, another constitution application to jammu kashmir order c. o. 48 was made by the president which inter alia applied art.
31a and 31b to the state with certain modifications and included the act in the ninth schedule of the constitution.
the last two orders were issued subsequent to the enactment of the act and so they would have no bearing on the decision of the points raised before us.
we have briefly referred to them for the sake of completing the narrative of the material events.
the validity of the act is impeached mainly on the ground that yuvaraj karan singh had no authority to promulgate the said act.
it is this argument which has been urged before us by mr. chatterjee in different and alternative forms that needs careful examination.
the first attack against the competence of yuvaraj karan singh proceeds on the assumption that at the time when maharaja hari singh conveyed his powers to yuvaraj karan singh by his proclamation of june 20, 1949, he was himself no more than a constitutional monarch and as such he could convey to yuvaraj karan singh no higher powers.
let