--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

1 reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 5016 of 2016 mantri techzone pvt.
limited appellants versus forward foundation and ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondents with civil appeal numbers8002-8003 of 2016 civil appeal number12326 of 2016 civil appeal number9227 of 2016 civil appeal number1343 of 2017 civil appeal number10995 of 2016 civil appeal number10993 of 2016 civil appeal number10994 of 2016 civil appeal number2246 of 2018 civil appeal number10992 of 2016 civil appeal number12157 of 2016 civil appeal number12152 of 2016 civil appeal number12156 of 2016 civil appeal number12158 of 2016 civil appeal number12160 of 2016 civil appeal number12159 of 2016 civil appeal numbers4923-4924 of 2017 signature not verified digitally signed by ashwani kumar date 2019.03.05 175153 ist reason civil appeal number14966 of 2017 2 judgment s.abdul nazeer, j. 1.
these appeals have been preferred under section 22 of the national green tribunal act, 2010 for brevity ngt act challenging the judgment and order dated 07.05.2015 and 04.05.2016 respectively passed by the principal bench of the national green tribunal, new delhi for short the tribunal .
2. the appellants in civil appeal numbers 5016 of 2016 and 8002-8003 of 2016 are respondent numbers 9 and 10 in the original application number 222 of 2014 hereinafter referred to as the respondent numbers 9 and 10 .
the said application was filed by respondent numbers1 to 3 herein hereinafter referred to as the applicants .
respondent numbers 4 to 7 in these appeals are the state of karnataka and other authorities.
they were arrayed as respondent numbers 1 to 4 in the application.
respondent numbers 12 and 13 herein were subsequently impleaded in the application for short the impleaded respondents .
3. the state of karnataka has filed civil appeal numbers 4923-4924 of 2017, challenging the general condition and direction number 1 contained in the order of the tribunal dated 04.05.2016.
the other appeals have been filed by different entities, who were not parties before the tribunal challenging the order of the tribunal dated 04.05.2016 insofar as it directs a buffer green zone of 75 meters in respect of lakes, 50 meters in respect of primary rajakaluves, 35 meters in case of secondary rajakaluves and 25 meters in case of tertiary rajakaluves with retrospective effect.
according to them, they are adversely affected by the aforesaid condition in the impugned order.
4. the applicants filed o.a. number222 of 2014 by contending that ecologically sensitive land was allotted by the karnataka industrial area development board for short the kiadb to respondent numbers 9 and 10 vide notifications dated 23.04.2004 and 07.05.2004 respectively for setting up of software technology park, commercial and residential complex, hotel and multi level car parks.
the master plan formulated by the bangalore development authority for short the bda , identifies the allotted land as residential sensitive, though the same land was identified in the draft master plan as protected zone.
it was further contended that the revenue map in respect of properties as referred in the land lease agreements has multiple rajakaluves storm water drains .
the development projects in question sit right on the catchment and wetland area which feeds the rajakaluves, which in turn drains rain water into bellandur lake.
the project will thus encroach two rajakaluves of 1.38 acres and 1.23 acres each.
5. the satellite digital images of the area from the year 2000 to 2012 show encroachment upon these rajakaluves, as well as the manner in which they are covered by the construction.
the state level expert appraisal committee for short seac , which was to assist the state level environment impact assessment authority for short seiaa , held its meetings on various dates to examine the project.
it had required the appellant number9 to submit a revised noc from the bangalore water supply and sewerage board for short bwssb for the project in question.
it was also observed that the project lies between the bellandur lake and the agara lake.
respondent number9 was also directed to take protective measures to spare the buffer zone around rajakaluves and also to commit that no construction would be carried out in the buffer zone.
in the meeting of 11.11.2011, it was recorded that the project proposes car parking facility for 14,438 cars in that environmentally sensitive area.
6. it was alleged that noc was issued covering an area of 17,404 sq. mtrs.
whereas the built up area, as noted by seac, is 13,50,454.98 sq. mtrs.
respondent number9 obtained noc from bwssb by concealing material facts and by misrepresenting that noc is required only for residential units which form a very minuscule part of the total project.
respondent number9 had approached the karnataka state pollution control board for short the kspcb for obtaining clearance, which was granted on 04.09.2012 subject to the fulfillment of the conditions stated in the consent order which included leaving the buffer zone all along the valley and towards the lake.
it is further contended that the grant of consent by the kspcb to respondent number9 also contained a condition with regard to obtaining environmental clearance from the competent authority and no construction was to commence until such clearance was granted.
7. applicants further contended that respondent number9 violated the conditions and commenced construction of the project.
there was also violation of the stipulations stated in the approval of seac in relation to buffer zone and construction over rajakaluves.
the construction had been commenced over the ecologically sensitive area of the lake catchment area and valley, with utter disregard to the statutory compliances.
referring to these blatant irregularities, the applicant submitted that the conversion of land from protected zone to residential sensitive area is violative of the law.
the project is right in the midst of a fragile wetland area which ought not to have been disturbed by the development activity.
the fragile environment of the catchment area has been exposed to grave and irreparable damage.
it has severely disturbed and damaged the rajakaluves.
respondent numbers 9 and 10 started to level the land by filling it with debris, thus causing damage to the drains.
the conditions with regard to no-disturbance to the storm water drains, natural valleys and buffer area in and around the rajakaluves have been violated.
it has in turn, affected the ground water table and bore wells which are the only source of water for thousands of households.
fishing and agriculture which depends on bellandur lake are also severely affected.
the construction over the wetland between the two lakes is in violation of wetlands conservation of management rules, 2010 for short rules of 2010 .
8.
it was submitted that seiaa in its meeting dated 29.09.2012, decided to close the file pertaining to respondent number 10 due to non-submission of requisite information and the application thereof was rejected in november, 2012.
despite the rejection, respondent number10 commenced construction on the project in full swing.
9. the applicants also relied upon the findings of the joint legislative committee, constituted under the chairmanship of shri a.t. ramaswamy in the month of july 2005, which stated that there were 262 water bodies in the bangalore city in 1961 which drastically came down because of trespass and encroachments.
it was also affirmed that about 840 kms. of rajakaluves have been encroached upon in several places and have become sewage channels.
the applicants also relied on the report of the committee under the chairmanship of honble mr. justice n.k . patil suggesting immediate remedial action in order to remove encroachments on the lake area and the rajakaluves and preservation of the lakes in and around bangalore city.
it was further contended that other expert committees, including lakshman rau expert committee had also submitted proposals for preservation, restoration or otherwise of the existing tanks in bangalore metropolitan area which recommended to maintain good water surface in bellandur tank and to ensure that the water in the tank is not polluted.
the central government in august 2013 had issued an advisory on conservation and restoration of water bodies in the urban areas.
the applicants claim to have obtained monitoring report of the project by respondent number5, ministry of environment and forests, through rti on 21.08.2013.
the report dated 14.08.2013 revealed that the project proponents are in clear breach of their undertaking to carry out all precautionary measures to ensure that the bellandur lake is not affected by the construction and operational phase of the project.
this approach is particularly with regard to the major alteration in natural sloping pattern of the project site and natural hydrology of the area.
10.
the lake development authority for short the lda , after inspection in the catchment area of the bellandur lake submitted its report dated 12.06.2013 which confirms that the project will have disastrous impact, including deleterious effect on the bellandur lake.
this report was brought to the notice of kiadb.
the lda has also opined that the land should be classified and maintained as sensitive area.
the kiadb called upon respondent number 9 to comply with the rules of ecology and environment department and to obtain necessary approval from kspcb and lda.
despite all this, respondent numbers 9 and 10 have continued with their illegal constructions and have caused damage to the ecology and the environment by irreparably jeopardizing the ecological balance in this sensitive area.
the applicants rely upon the revised master plan, 2013 issued by bda which specifically provides that 30 meters buffer zone is to be created around the lakes and 50 meters buffer zone to be created on either side of the rajakaluves.
it was also pleaded that respondent number 9 had obtained the noc from bwssb only with regard to residential units and not for the entire project and that the environmental clearance obtained by respondent number9 is based upon the partial noc issued by bwssb which itself is a misrepresentation.
it was contended that the projects are bound to create water scarcity as the requirement of the project of respondent number 9 alone is approximately 4.5 million liters per day, i.e. 135 million liters per month, which is more than what the bwssb supplies to the entire agaram ward.
the construction of respective projects by respondent numbers9 and 10 respectively, besides having commenced without permission from the authorities and being in violation of the conditions imposed for grant of permission consent, is bound to damage the environment, resulting in change in the topography of the area, posing potential threat of extinction of the bellandur lake, causing traffic congestion, shortening and wiping out the wetlands, extinction of rajakaluves and causing serious and potential threat of flooding and massive scarcity of water in the city of bangalore, particularly the areas located near the water bodies.
11. respondent number9 in its objections contended that it was incorporated with the objective of establishing an information technology park and r d centre with facilities such as residential complexes, parks, education centres and other allied infrastructure within a single compound.
it had submitted the proposal to establish such information technology park and other facilities to the state government and requested for allotment of land for the project.
its proposal was considered in 78th high level committee meeting held on 21.06.2000 and after examining the proposal, it was approved by the government on 06.07.2000.
before the state high level committee, it had informed that its requirement was 110 acres of land, 25 mw of power from the karnataka power transmission corporation limited for short the kptcl , and four lakh litres of water per day from bwssb.
the lands for the project were initially notified vide notification dated 10.02.2004.
subsequently, the lands were allotted vide letter dated 28.06.2007 for which lease-cum-sale agreement was signed on 30.06.2007.
considering the overall development of the state of bangalore, this respondent proposed a mixed use development project consisting of an information technology park, residential apartments, retail, hotel and office buildings with a total built up area of 13,50,454.98 sq mtrs.
the project was conceived as a zero waste discharge project.
the project is located one and a half kms.
away from the southern-side of the bellandur lake.
towards the north, adjacent to the project, lies vast stretches of lands belonging to the defence and towards the east, lies the project of respondent number 10 and another developer is also developing a project on the western side.
it has obtained sanction plan on 04.07.2007 which was renewed from time to time.
12.
respondent number 9 claims that it has obtained noc from airport authority of india on 09.04.2010.
bharat sanchar nigam ltd, vide its communication dated 16.04.2010, granted clearance for the project construction.
bwssb, vide its communication dated 26.04.2011 issued noc for portion of the proposed construction to be built.
the bangalore electricity supply company limited also granted noc for arranging power supply to the proposed residential and commercial building in its favour.
environmental clearance was granted by seiaa vide communication dated 17.04.2012.
the director general of police has issued noc and kspcb vide order dated 04.09.2012 accorded its consent for construction of the said project subject to the conditions stated therein.
it was further stated that after grant of the environmental clearance on 17.09.2012, the same was published in the leading newspapers kannada prabha and the indian express on 12.03.2012 and 14.03.2014 respectively.
13.
it submitted a modified the building plan which was approved by kiadb vide its letter dated 30.08.2012, which was valid up to 10.08.2014.
it started the construction of the project in november 2012, taking all precautions as per terms and conditions of the orders issued by the competent authorities.
it was also submitted that it has raised the constructions in accordance with the plans and conditions of the environmental clearance and consent orders and that it has not violated any of the conditions and has not caused any adverse impact on the ecology and environment of the area.
it has denied the contention that its construction activity has blocked the rajakaluves and has adversely affected the lake.
it has already spent a sum of rs 306.73 crores on the project towards procurement of men and materials, machinery, infrastructure, medical and sanitary facilities, etc. and that it has availed financial assistance from various banks and financial institutions towards the construction and execution of the project and that various contracts have been signed with the third parties.
it is specifically pleaded that the petition is barred by time and suffers from defects and laches.
14.
respondent number10 pleaded that the applicants raised multifarious proceedings against it which is an abuse of the process of law and mala fide.
it had submitted a revised proposal in respect of its project in question and to obtain fresh clearance on 31.08.2007 with an investment of rs. 179.22 crores.
the state high level committee had cleared the project which was communicated to it on 25.01.2008.
its properties are located in between bellandur lake and agara lake but there are no primary storm water drains and secondary storm water drains that exist in its properties.
it has clearances from various authorities, including environmental clearance and consent for establishment.
15. kiadb stated that after possession of the land was handed over to respondent numbers 9 and 10, one year time was granted for the implementation of the project which was extended from time to time.
the building drawings were approved on 04.07.2007, and the modified building drawings were approved on 26.04.2011 and 30.08.2012 with specific conditions.
in its meeting held on 16.07.2013, it was resolved to inform respondent number 9 to fully comply with the ecology and environment rules and to obtain approvals from the lda and kspcb.
lda vide its letter dated 24.09.2013, had informed kiadb that the construction activity in the catchment area in the bellandur lake could drastically impact the lake with deleterious effects and asked it to stop construction activity of respondent numbers 9 and 10.
however, the validity of the building drawings was again extended up to 10.08.2014.
the lokayukta on 17.12.2013 had written a letter in respect of complaint filed by the south east forum for sustainable development where it had been averred that the decision had been taken by the board on 21.12.2013 to keep in abeyance the approval accorded and even the re-validations of plans.
this was also informed to respondent number9.
the board took a decision which was communicated to respondent number9 on 02.01.2014, wherein it asked the respondent number9 to stop all construction activities on the allotted lands.
the said communication was challenged by respondent number 9 and on the stop-work notice, stay was granted by the high court of karnataka.
the stop-work notice dated 23.12.2013 issued by bruhat bengaluru mahanagara palike for short bbmp was also stayed vide order dated 21.01.2014.
the proposal submitted by respondent numbers 9 and 10 had been approved by the state government.
the land allotted to respondent numbers 9 and 10 does not consist of any rajakaluves.
16.
the lda took a stand that it was not at all aware of the project initiated by kiadb.
it came to know about the entire project only when certain newspaper reports surfaced during the month of june, 2013 and till that time it was in the dark.
after the complaints, it inspected the bellandur lake and the agara lake on 12.06.2013 and prepared an inspection report.
in the report, it was noticed that large scale construction activities were going on in the catchment area of bellandur lake and that there was a change in the land use, which in turn has directly affected the catchment of bellandur lake.
the wetland area of agara lake had also shrunk, which originally formed the irrigation area for the adjoining agricultural lands.
therefore, it had questioned the decision of kiadb vide letter dated 06.07.2013 and even requested it to stop the construction activity and to re-classify the land as non-sez area.
it was thereafter on 31.08.2013, that respondent number 9 wrote a letter for according approval for the proposed development projects.
however, vide its letter dated 23.09.2013, lda informed kiadb that it had no authority to grant or deny construction projects, but it also communicated its objections to kiadb mentioning that construction activity would be in contravention of the directions of the supreme court.
despite these warnings, kiadb granted approval to the extension of the building drawings of the project in favour of the project proponents with certain conditions, like ensuring that all natural valleys, valley zone, irrigation tanks and existing roads leading to villages in the said land should not be disturbed.
further, the natural sloping pattern of the project site was not to be altered and the lakes and other water bodies within and or at the vicinity of the project area should be protected and conserved.
despite the objections, the plans were approved and approvals were extended from time to time.
it has taken a categorical stand that the projects as approved by the kiadb would have adverse impact on bellandur and agara lakes.
17.
on the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the tribunal framed the following questions for consideration and determination 1.
whether the application filed by the applicants and supported by respondent numbers 11 and 12, is barred by time and thus, not maintainable?
2. whether the petition as framed and reliefs claimed therein, disclose a cause of action over which this tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain and decide the application under the provisions of the ngt act, 2010?
3. whether the present application is barred by the principle of res judicata and or constructive res judicata?
4. whether the application filed by the applicants should not be entertained or it is not maintainable before the tribunal, in view of the pendency of the writ petitions 36567-74 of 2013, before the honble high court of karnataka?
and 5.
what relief, if any, are the applicants entitled to?
should or not the tribunal, in the interest of environment and ecology issue any directions and if so, to what effect?
18.
the tribunal by its order dated 07.05.2015 at annexure a-2, disposed of the applications with the following directions 1 we decline to pass any direction or order to stop further progress and or demolition of the project or any part thereof at this stage.
however, we constitute the following committee to inspect the projects in question and submit a report to the tribunal inter alia but specifically on the issues stated hereinafter a advisor in the ministry of environment and forest dealing with the subject of wetlands.
b ceo of the lake development authority, karnataka state.
c chief town planner of bbmp, bangalore.
d chairman of seac which recommended the grant of environmental clearance to the projects in question.
e sr.
scientist ecology from the indian institute of sciences, bangalore.
f dr. siddharth kaul, former advisor to moef.
g a senior officer from the national institute of hydrology, roorkee.
2 member secretary of the karnataka state pollution control board shall act as the convener of the committee and would submit the final report to the tribunal.
3 the committee shall inspect not only the sites where the projects in question are located but even other areas of bangalore which the committee in its wisdom may consider appropriate, in order to examine the interconnectivity of lakes and impact of such activities upon the water bodies with particular reference to lakes.
4 the committee shall submit whether the projects in question have encroached upon or are constructed on the wetlands and rajakaluves.
if so, are there any adverse environmental and ecological impact of these projects on the lake, particularly bellandur lake and agara lake, as well the rajakaluves.
the report should specify, if any rajakaluves have been covered by the construction activities of respondent numbers 9 and 10 or by any of the projects in the area in question.
5 committee should submit in its report, if these projects have any adverse impacts upon the surrounding ecology and environment, with particular reference to lakes and wetlands.
if yes, then whether any part of the project is required to be demolished.
if so, details thereof along with reasons.
6 the committee shall substantially notice if any of the conditions of the environmental clearance order in each case of respondent numbers 9 and 10 have been violated.
if so, to what extent and suggest remedial measures in that behalf to restore the ecology of the area.
7 the committee would also recommend what should be the buffer zone around the lake s and interconnecting passages and wetlands.
the committee shall also report, whether activities of multipurpose projects which have serious repercussions on traffic, air pollution, environment and allied subjects should be permitted any further or not, particularly, in wetlands and catchment areas of water bodies.
8 recommendations should be made with regard to the steps and measures that should be taken for restoration of lakes, particularly in the city of bangalore.
9 the committee shall also find out that whether the construction of the projects is in accordance with the sanctioned drawings and bye-laws in accordance with the letters dated 4th july, 2007 and 22nd april, 2008 respectively.
further, the committee would also report whether both respondent numbers 9 and 10 have installed etp stp and have taken full measures for recycling of used water for washing and flushing, etc. in terms of letters dated 11 th october, 2013 and 3rd january, 2013, issued by the karnataka industrial area development board to respondent numbers 9 and 10 respectively.
10 in the event, the committee is of the opinion that the adverse impacts noticed are redeemable, then what directions need to be issued in that behalf and the cost involved for achieving the said conservation and restoration of lakes and water bodies.
11 till the submission of the report by the committee and directions passed by the tribunal in that regard, both respondent numbers 9 and 10 are hereby restrained from creating any 3rd party interests or part with the possession of the property in question or any part thereof, in favour of any person.
12 the committee shall submit its report to moef and to this tribunal as expeditiously as possible and in any case not later than three months from today.
during that period we restrain moef, seiaa and or any public authority from sanctioning any construction project on the wetlands and catchment areas of the water bodies in the city of bangalore.
13 the committee shall report if the project proponents are proposing to discharge their trade or domestic effluents into the lake or any of the water bodies in and around of the area in question.
14 for the reasons stated in the judgment, respondent number 9 is liable and shall pay a sum of rs.
117.35 crores, while respondent number 10 shall pay a sum of rs. 22.5 crores respectively being 5 per cent of the project value, within two weeks from today.
the said amount would be paid to the kspcb, which shall maintain a separate account for the same and would spend this amount for environmental and ecological restoration, restitution and other measures to be taken to rectify the damage resulting from default and noncompliance to law by the project proponent in that area, after taking approval of the tribunal.
15 we make it clear that the said respondents would not be entitled to pass on the amount in terms of direction 14, on to the purchasers because this liability accrues as a result of their own intentional defaults, disobedience of law in force and carrying on project activities and construction illegally and unauthorizedly.
19. feeling aggrieved by the said order, respondent numbers 9 and 10 filed civil appeal numbers 4829 and 4823 of 2015 before this court.
this court by its order dated 20th may, 2015 passed the following order one of the main contentions raised by the appellants in these appeals is that though the tribunal had heard the matter only on preliminary issues and no arguments on merit were advanced, final judgment decides the merits of the disputes as well and above all a penalty of rs.117.35 crores against the original respondent number9 the appellant in c.a. number 4832 of 2015 and rs. 22.5 crores against original respondent number 10 the appellant in c.a. number 4829/2015 is imposed.
on the aforesaid averment, we feel that it would be more appropriate for the appellant to file an application before the tribunal with the prayer to recall the order on merits and decide the matter afresh after hearing the counsel for the parties, as the tribunal knows better as to what transpired at the time of hearing.
with the aforesaid liberty granted to the petitioners, the appeals are disposed of.
certain preliminary issues are decided against the appellants which are also the subject matter of challenge.
however, it is not necessary to deal with the same this stage.
we make it clear that in case the said application is decided against the appellants or if ultimately on merits, it would be open to the appellants to challenge those orders by filing the appeal and in that appeal all the issues which are decided in the impugned judgment can also be raised.
the counsel for the appellants state that they would file the requisite application within one week.
till the said application is decided by the tribunal, there shall be stay of the direction pertaining the payment of aforesaid penalty.
mr. raj panjwani points out that the tribunal has allowed the appellants to proceed with the construction only on the payment of the aforesaid fine penalty.
we leave it to the tribunal to pass whatever orders it deems fit in this behalf, after hearing the parties.
20. in relation to issue number5, an opportunity of hearing was granted to the respondents.
the tribunal passed order dated 06.04.2016 on these applications as under m.a. number 603 of 2015 and m.a. number 596 of these applications have been filed on behalf of the respondent 9 10 respectively.
it is not necessary for us to refer to any details in view of the directions that we propose to issue in this case.
without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties and subject to just exception we would hear the parties in terms of the order of the honble supreme court of india primarily on the question of imposition of environmental compensation and merits attached in relation thereto.
parties are given liberty to address their submissions on that behalf. of 2015 and m.a. number 596 of 2015 stand disposed of without any order as to cost.
21.
it is evident from the above orders that the tribunal had granted opportunity to the parties to address it limited question, as aforementioned.
the tribunal after hearing the parties passed an order dated 04.05.2016 as under general conditions or directions 1. in view of our discussion in the main judgment, we are of the considered view that the fixation of distance from water bodies lakes and rajkalewas suffers from the inbuilt contradiction, legal infirmity and is without any scientific justification.
the rmp 2015 provides 50m from middle of the rajkalewas as buffer zone in the case of primary rajkalewas, 25m in the case of secondary rajkulewas and 15m in the tertiary rajkulewas in contradiction to the 30m in the case of lake which is certainly much bigger water body and its utility as a water body wetland is well known certainly part of wet land.
thus, we direct that the distance in the case of respondents numbers 9 and 10 from rajkulewas, waterbodies and wetlands shall be maintained as below- i in the case of lakes, 75m from the periphery of water body to be maintained as green belt and buffer zone for all the existing water bodies i.e. lakes wetlands. ii 50m from the edge of the primary rajkulewas. iii 35m from the edges in the case of secondary rajkulewas iv 25m from the edges in the case of tertiary rajkulewas this buffer green zone would be treated as no construction zone for all intent and purposes.
this is absolutely essential for the purposes of sustainable development particularly keeping in mind the ecology and environment of the areas in question.
all the offending constructions raised by respondents numbers 9 and 10 of any kind including boundary wall shall be demolished which falls within such areas.
wherever necessary dredging operations are required, the same should be carried out to restore the original capacity of the water spread area and or wetlands.
not only the existing construction would be removed but also none of these respondents - project proponent would be permitted to raise any construction in this zone.
all authorities particularly lake development authority shall carry out this operation in respect of all the water bodies lakes of bangalore.
2. the capacity of the existing stps to treat sewage is 729 mld, whereas another 500 mld sewage is proposed to be treated in 10 upcoming stps.
in this context, all the stps operating in the area whether government or privately owned, should meet the revised standards notified by cpcb moef.
3. bangalore city receives treated potable water of 1360 mld from river cauvery whereas the requirement is for another 750 mld and the entire area falls in critical zone in terms of ground water exploitation.
information reveals that only one million litre per month of stp treated water is used by builders for construction purposes.
for this reason, the bwssb issues partial noc to various residential and commercial projects in respect of supply of potable water.
in this context, following directions need to be issued i. at the time of grant of ec, the water requirement for the construction phase and operation phase should be considered separately.
due consideration should also be given for identification of source of supply of water and this should be a pre-requisite for grant of ec.
ii.
all the project proponents should necessarily use only treated sewage water for construction purpose and this should be reflected in ec