--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil original jurisdiction writ petition civil number 1031 of 2019 anuradha bhasin petitioner versus union of india and ors.
respondent s and writ petition civil number 1164 of 2019 ghulam nabi azad petitioner versus union of india and anr.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondent s judgment table of contents introduction a contentions b issues c production of orders d fundamental rights under part iii and restrictions e thereof signature not verified digitally signed by internet shutdown f geeta ahuja date 2020.01.10 124427 ist reason restrictions under section 144, cr.p.c.
g freedom of the press h conclusion i n. v. ramana, j. a. introduction it was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of light, it was the season of darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to heaven, we were all going direct the other way in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.
charles dickens in a tale of two cities 1.
although cherished in our heart as a paradise on earth, the history of this beautiful land is etched with violence and militancy.
while the mountains of himalayas spell tranquillity, yet blood is shed every day.
in this land of inherent contradictions, these petitions add to the list, wherein two sides have shown two different pictures which are diametrically opposite and factually irreconcilable.
in this context, this courts job is compounded by the magnitude of the task before it.
it goes without saying that this court will not delve into the political propriety of the decision taken herein, which is best left for democratic forces to act on.
our limited scope is to strike a balance between the liberty and security concerns so that the right to life is secured and enjoyed in the best possible manner.
2. liberty and security have always been at loggerheads.
the question before us, simply put, is what do we need more, liberty or security?
although the choice is seemingly challenging, we need to clear ourselves from the platitude of rhetoric and provide a meaningful answer so that every citizen has adequate security and sufficient liberty.
the pendulum of preference should not swing in either extreme direction so that one preference compromises the other.
it is not our forte to answer whether it is better to be free than secure or be secure rather than free.
however, we are here only to ensure that citizens are provided all the rights and liberty to the highest extent in a given situation while ensuring security at the same time.
3. the genesis of the issue starts with the security advisory issued by the civil secretariat, home department, government of jammu and kashmir, advising the tourists and the amarnath yatris to curtail their stay and make arrangements for their return in the interest of safety and security.
subsequently, educational institutions and offices were ordered to remain shut until further orders.
on 04.08.2019, mobile phone networks, internet services, landline connectivity were all discontinued in the valley, with restrictions on movement also being imposed in some areas.
4. on 05.08.2019, constitutional order 272 was issued by the president, applying all provisions of the constitution of india to the state of jammu and kashmir, and modifying article 367 interpretation in its application to the state of jammu and kashmir.
in light of the prevailing circumstances, on the same day, the district magistrates, apprehending breach of peace and tranquillity, imposed restrictions on movement and public gatherings by virtue of powers vested under section 144, cr.p.c.
due to the aforesaid restrictions, the petitioner in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 claims that the movement of journalists was severely restricted and on 05.08.2019, the kashmir times srinagar edition could not be distributed.
the petitioner has submitted that since 06.08.2019, she has been unable to publish the srinagar edition of kashmir times pursuant to the aforesaid restrictions.
5. aggrieved by the same, the petitioners ms. anuradha bhasin and mr. ghulam nabi azad approached this court under article 32 of the constitution seeking issuance of an appropriate writ for setting aside or quashing any and all order s , notification s , direction s and or circular s issued by the respondents under which any all modes of communication including internet, mobile and fixed line telecommunication services have been shut down or suspended or in any way made inaccessible or unavailable in any locality.
further, the petitioners sought the issuance of an appropriate writ or direction directing respondents to immediately restore all modes of communication including mobile, internet and landline services throughout jammu and kashmir in order to provide an enabling environment for the media to practice its profession.
moreover, the petitioner in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 also pleaded to pass any appropriate writ or direction directing the respondents to take necessary steps for ensuring free and safe movement of reporters and journalists and other media personnel.
lastly, she also pleaded for the framing of guidelines ensuring that the rights and means of media personnel to report and publish news is not unreasonably curtailed.
6. moreover, mr. ghulam nabi azad petitioner in w.p. c number 1164 of 2019 , alleges that he was stopped from travelling to his constituency in jammu and kashmir.
in this context, he alleges that due to the aforesaid restrictions, he is not able to communicate with the people of his constituency.
7. when w.p. c number 1164 of 2019 by mr. ghulam nabi azad , was listed before a coordinate bench of this court on 16.09.2019, the following order was passed issue notice.
we permit the petitioner to go to srinagar and visit the following districts, subject to restrictions, if any i srinagar, ii anantnag, iii baramulla and iv jammu.
the petitioner has undertaken before the court on his own volition that he will not indulge in any political rally or political activity during his visit.
the visit will solely be concerned with making an assessment of the impact of the present situation on the life of the daily wage earners, if any.
so far as prayers 2 and 3 of the writ petition are concerned, the state as well as, the union of india will respond within two weeks hence.
8.
when w.p. c number 1031 of 2019, was listed on 16.08.2019, the matter was ordered to be tagged along with w.p. c number 1013 of 2019 fivejudge bench and was later detagged.
on 16.09.2019, a coordinate bench of this court ordered the following the state of jammu kashmir, keeping in mind the national interest and internal security, shall make all endeavours to ensure that normal life is restored in kashmir people have access to healthcare facilities and schools, colleges and other educational institutions and public transport functions and operates normally.
all forms of communication, subject to overriding consideration of national security, shall be normalized, if required on a selective basis, particularly for healthcare facilities.
when the said writ petition was listed before this bench on 01.10.2019, in light of expediency, this bench directed that no further intervention applications shall be entertained.
however, liberty was granted to file additional documents in support of applications for intervention.
when the matter came up for hearing on the next date on 16.10.2019, the following order was passed when these matters came up for hearing today, learned solicitor general appearing for the union of india made a submission that after filing the counter affidavit in these matters, certain further developments have taken place and some of the restrictions imposed have been relaxed, particularly with reference to mobile connectivity as well as the landlines services etc.
and, therefore, he wants to file another additional affidavit indicating the steps taken by the government about relaxation of some restrictions.
he also made a request to accommodate him for a week only.
during the course of hearing, we are informed by the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners that the orders which are issued by the authorities relating to the restrictions imposed have not been provided to them so far.
when we asked the learned solicitor general about the non supply of orders issued by the authorities relating to the restrictions imposed, particularly with respect to the cell phone services as well as section 144 proceedings, he claims privilege over those orders.
he, however, states that those orders can be produced before this court.
however, if for any reason, learned solicitor general does not want to give a copy of those orders to the petitioners, we request him to file an affidavit indicating the reasons for claiming such privilege.
on 24.10.2019, after the aforesaid orders were placed on record and pleadings were complete, the matter was listed for final disposal on 05.11.2019.
taking into account the concerns expressed by the parties, we extensively heard the counsel for both sides, as well as all the intervenors on 05.11.2019, 06.11.2019, 07.11.2019, 14.11.2019, 19.11.2019, 21.11.2019, 26.11.2019 and 27.11.2019, and considered all the submissions made and documents placed before us.
b. contentions ms. vrinda grover, counsel for the petitioner in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 it was contended that the petitioner, being executive editor of one of the major newspapers, was not able to function post 05.08.2019, due to various restrictions imposed on the press.
print media came to a grinding halt due to nonavailability of internet services, which in her view, is absolutely essential for the modern press.
curtailment of the internet, is a restriction on the right to free speech, should be tested on the basis of reasonableness and proportionality.
the procedure that is to be followed for restricting internet services is provided under the temporary suspension of telecom services public emergency or public service rules, 2017 hereinafter suspension rules, which were notified under the telegraph act.
the suspension rules indicate that the restriction imposed was contemplated to be of a temporary nature.
the orders passed under the suspension rules placed on record by the state of jammu and kashmir, regarding the restrictions pertaining to the internet and phones either mobile or telephone were ex facie perverse and suffered from nonapplication of mind.
learned counsel submitted that the orders were not in compliance with the procedure prescribed under the suspension rules.
further, the orders did not provide any reasoning as to the necessity of the restrictions, as is required under the suspension rules.
lastly, the learned counsel contended that the orders are based on an apprehension of likelihood that there would be danger to a law and order situation.
public order is not the same as law and order, and the situation at the time when the orders were passed did not warrant the passing of the orders resulting in restrictions.
mr. kapil sibal, senior counsel for the petitioner in w.p. c number 1164 of 2019 learned senior counsel submitted that the orders of the authorities had to be produced before the court, and cannot be the subject of privilege, as claimed by the state.
it was submitted that the conduct of the state, in producing documents and status reports during argumentation, was improper, as it did not allow the petitioners with sufficient opportunity to rebut the same.
learned senior counsel submitted that the union of india can declare an emergency only in certain limited situations.
neither any internal disturbance nor any external aggression has been shown in the present case for the imposition of restrictions which are akin to the declaration of emergency.
with respect to the orders restricting movement passed under section 144, cr.p.c., the learned senior counsel contended that such an order is made to deal with a law and order situation, but the orders do not indicate any existing law and order issue, or apprehension thereof.
learned senior counsel pointed out that the order of the magistrate under section 144, cr.p.c.
cannot be passed to the public generally, and must be specifically against the people or the group which is apprehended to disturb the peace.
it is necessary for the state to identify the persons causing the problem, and an entire state cannot be brought to a halt.
moreover, he has contended that there was no application of mind before passing those orders.
while submitting that it could be assumed that there was some material available for the purpose of passing the orders under section 144, cr.p.c., the question which then arises is how the state balances the rights of individuals.
the learned senior counsel, with respect to the communications restrictions, submitted that the state had not indicated as to the necessity to block landline services.
he further submitted that the communications internet restrictions which were imposed under the indian telegraph act, 1885 hereinafter telegraph act needs to follow the provisions of section 5 of the telegraph act, in line with article 19 of the constitution.
while there can be some restrictions, there can be no blanket orders, as it would amount to a complete ban.
instead, a distinction should be drawn while imposing restrictions on social media mass communication and the general internet.
the least restrictive option must be put in place, and the state should have taken preventive or protective measures.
ultimately, the state needs to balance the safety of the people with their lawful exercise of their fundamental rights.
on internet restrictions, the learned senior counsel submitted that such restrictions not only impact the right to free speech of individuals but also impinges on their right to trade.
therefore, a less restrictive measure, such as restricting only social media websites like facebook and whatsapp, should and could have been passed, as has been done in india while prohibiting human trafficking and child pornography websites.
the learned senior counsel pointed to orders passed in bihar, and in jammu and kashmir in 2017, restricting only social media websites, and submitted that the same could have been followed in this case as well.
indicating that the state can impose restrictions, the learned senior counsel focussed on the question of the least restrictive measure that can be passed.
the learned senior counsel submitted that while imposing restrictions, the rights of individuals need to be balanced against the duty of the state to ensure security.
the state must ensure that measures are in place that allows people to continue with their life, such as public transportation for work and schools, to facilitate business, etc.
mr. huzefa ahmadi, senior counsel for intervenor in i.a. number 139141 of 2019 in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 the learned senior counsel emphasized on the term reasonable, as used in article 19 2 of the constitution, and submitted that the restrictions on the freedom of speech should be reasonable as mandated under article 19 of the constitution.
these restrictions need to be tested on the anvil of the test of proportionality.
learned senior counsel submitted that section 144, cr.p.c.
orders should be based on some objective material and not merely on conjectures.
mr. dushyant dave, senior counsel for the intervenor in i.a. number 139555 in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 learned senior counsel attempted to highlight that the issue of balancing the measures necessary for ensuring national security or curbing terrorism, with the rights of the citizens, is an endeavour that is not unique, and has been undertaken by courts in various jurisdictions.
learned senior counsel relied on the judgment of the supreme court of israel concerning the legality of the general security services interrogation methods in public committee against torture in israel v. israel, 38 i.l.m.
1471 1999 relating to the question of whether torture during interrogation of an alleged terrorist was permissible.
in that case, the israeli supreme court held that such acts were unconstitutional, and could not be justified in light of the freedoms and liberties afforded to the citizens of israel.
learned senior counsel drew parallels between the situation faced by the israeli supreme court in the abovementioned case, and that before this court, wherein, according to the learned senior counsel, the state is attempting to justify the restrictions due to the circumstances prevailing in the state of jammu and kashmir.
the learned senior counsel submitted that such a justification merits rejection as it would amount to granting too much power to the state to impose broad restrictions on fundamental rights in varied situations.
it would amount to individual liberty being subsumed by social control.
the learned senior counsel emphasized on the seriousness of the present matter, stating that such restrictions on the fundamental rights is the reason for the placement of article 32 of the constitution in part iii, as a fundamental right which allows for the enforcement of the other fundamental rights.
he referred to the constituent assembly debates to highlight the import of article 32, as contemplated by the members of the constituent assembly.
the learned senior counsel also placed before this court the government of india national telecom policy, 2012, and submitted that the wide restrictions imposed by the state are in contravention of the aforementioned policy.
he submitted that the freedom of speech and expression is meant to allow people to discuss the burning topic of the day, including the abrogation of article 370 of the constitution.
lastly, the learned senior counsel emphasized that the restrictions that were imposed are meant to be temporary in nature, have lasted for more than 100 days, which fact should be taken into account by this court while deciding the matter.
ms. meenakshi arora, senior counsel for the intervenor in i.a. number 140276 in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 learned senior counsel submitted that articles 19 and 21 of the constitution require that any action of the state must demonstrate five essential features a backing of a law, b legitimacy of purpose, c rational connection of the act and object, d necessity of the action, and e when the above four are established, then the test of proportionality.
at the outset, learned senior counsel submitted that it is necessary to test the validity of the orders by reference to the facts and circumstances prevailing on the date of passing of the said orders, i.e., 04.08.2019.
learned senior counsel submitted that the orders that have not been published cannot be accorded the force of law.
the necessity of publication of law is a part of the rule of natural justice.
not only must the orders be published, it is also necessary that these orders be made available and accessible to the public.
the state cannot refuse to produce the orders before the court or claim any privilege.
the learned senior counsel further submitted that, notwithstanding the expediency of the situation, the necessity of a measure must be shown by the state.
the people have a right to speak their view, whether good, bad or ugly, and the state must prove that it was necessary to restrict the same.
on the point of proportionality, the learned senior counsel submitted that the test of proportionality was upheld by this court in the case of k. s. puttaswamy v. union of india, 2017 10 scc 1 hereinafter k. s. puttaswamy privacy 9j. and therefore the proportionality of a measure must be determined while looking at the restrictions being imposed by the state on the fundamental rights of citizens.
the learned senior counsel pointed out that it is not just the legal and physical restrictions that must be looked at, but also the fear that these sorts of restrictions engender in the minds of the populace, while looking at the proportionality of measures.
mr. sanjay hegde, senior counsel for the petitioner in w.p. crl. number 225 of 2019 although this writ petition was withdrawn during arguments, the learned senior counsel wished to make certain submissions regarding the issue at hand.
the learned senior counsel submitted on behalf of the petitioner that although he and his family were law abiding citizens, yet they are suffering the effects of the restrictions.
citing the house of lords judgment of liversidge v. anderson, 1941 3 all er 338 the learned senior counsel submitted that it was the dissent by lord atkin, upholding the fundamental rights of the citizens of the united kingdom, which is now the law of the land.
mr. k. k. venugopal, learned attorney general for the union of india the learned attorney general supported the submissions made by the solicitor general.
he submitted that the background of terrorism in the state of jammu and kashmir needs to be taken into account.
relying on national investigation agency v. zahoor ahmad shah watali, 2019 5 scc 1, the learned attorney general submitted that this court while deciding the aforementioned case, has taken cognizance of the problem of terrorism in the state before.
according to the learned attorney general, keeping in mind the facts regarding cross border terrorism and internal militancy, it would have been foolish to have not taken any preventive measures in the circumstances.
the necessity of the orders under section 144, cr.p.c. are apparent from the background facts and circumstances, when there can be huge violence if the government did not take these kinds of measures.
in fact, similar steps were taken earlier by the government in 2016 when a terrorist was killed in the state.
mr. tushar mehta, solicitor general for the state of jammu and kashmir the learned solicitor general submitted that the first and foremost duty of the state is to ensure security and protect the citizens their lives, limbs and property.
he further submitted that the facts relied on by the petitioners and the intervenors were incorrect, as they did not have the correct information about the factual position on the ground in the state of jammu and kashmir.
the learned solicitor general submitted that the historical background of the state of jammu and kashmir is necessary to be looked at to understand the measures taken by the state.
the state has been a victim of both physical and digital cross border terrorism.
the abrogation of article 370 of the constitution on 05.08.2019 was a historic step, which resulted not in the taking away of the rights of the citizens of jammu and kashmir, but conferment of rights upon them which they never had.
now, with the abrogation, 106 people friendly laws have become applicable to the state of jammu and kashmir.
the learned solicitor general submitted that the petitioners were incorrect to state that public movement was restricted.
in fact, individual movement had never been restricted.
additionally, while schools were closed initially, they have now been reopened.
depending on the facts, circumstances and requirements of an area, restrictions were put in place which are now being relaxed gradually.
on the orders passed by the magistrates under section 144, cr.p.c., in their respective jurisdictional areas, the learned solicitor general submitted that they were best placed to know the situation on the ground, and then took their respective decisions accordingly.
currently, there is nearly hundred percent relaxation of restrictions.
restrictions were being relaxed on the basis of the threat perception.
restrictions were never imposed in the ladakh region.
this fact shows that there was application of mind while passing the orders by the officers on the ground, and that there was no general clampdown, as is being suggested by the petitioners.
further, the learned solicitor general pointed to various figures to indicate that people were leading their ordinary lives in the state.
he submitted that all newspapers, television and radio channels are functioning, including from srinagar, where the petitioner in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 is situated.
the learned solicitor general further indicated that the government had taken certain measures to ensure that essential facilities would be available to the populace.
the learned solicitor general submitted that orders passed under section 144, cr.p.c.
can be preventive in nature, in order to prevent danger to public safety.
the magistrate can pass the order even on the basis of personal knowledge, and the same is supposed to be a speedy mechanism.
the orders passed must be considered keeping in mind the history and the background of the state.
relying on babulal parate v. state of bombay, air 1960 sc 51, and madhu limaye v. subdivisional magistrate, monghgyr, 1970 3 scc 746, the learned solicitor general submitted that the situation in the state of jammu and kashmir was such that the orders could be justified in view of maintenance of the security of the state.
regarding the petitioners submission that the restrictions could have been imposed on specific individuals, the learned solicitor general submitted that it was impossible to segregate, and control, the troublemakers from the ordinary citizens.
the learned solicitor general submitted that there were enough facts in the knowledge of the magistrate to pass the orders under section 144, cr.p.c.
there was sufficient speculation on the ground to suggest that there might be a move to abrogate article 370 of the constitution, and they were aware of the situation on the ground.
provocative speeches and messages were being transmitted.
this information is all available in the public domain.
it was further submitted that the court does not sit in appeal of the decision to impose restrictions under section 144, cr.p.c. and has limited jurisdiction to interfere, particularly when there are no allegations of mala fide made against the officers and when the question involved is of national security.
the level of restriction required is best left to the officers who are on the ground with the requisite information and knowledge, and the same is not to be replaced by the opinion of the courts.
with respect to the communications and internet shutdown, the learned solicitor general submitted that internet was never restricted in the jammu and ladakh regions.
further, he submitted that social media, which allowed people to send messages and communicate with a number of people at the same time, could be used as a means to incite violence.
the purpose of the limited and restricted use of internet is to ensure that the situation on the ground would not be aggravated by targeted messages from outside the country.
further, the internet allows for the transmission of false news or fake images, which are then used to spread violence.
the dark web allows individuals to purchase weapons and illegal substances easily.
the learned solicitor general submitted that the jurisprudence on free speech relating to newspapers cannot be applied to the internet, as both the media are different.
while newspapers only allowed oneway communication, the internet makes twoway communication by which spreading of messages are very easy.
the different context should be kept in mind by the court while dealing with the restrictions with respect to the two media.
while referring to various photographs, tweets and messages of political leaders of kashmir, he stated that these statements are highly misleading, abrasive and detrimental to the integrity and sovereignty of india.
further, it is not possible to ban only certain websites parts of the internet while allowing access to other parts.
such a measure was earlier attempted in 2017, but it was not successful.
lastly, the learned solicitor general submitted that the orders passed under the suspension rules were passed in compliance with the procedure in the suspension rules, and are being reviewed strictly in terms of the same.
9. some of the intervenors have supported the submissions made by the learned attorney general and the solicitor general, and indicated that the restrictions were necessary and in compliance with the law.
they have also submitted that normalcy is returning in the state of jammu and kashmir, and that the present petitions are not maintainable.
c. issues 10.
in line with aforesaid facts and arguments, the following questions of law arise for our consideration i.
whether the government can claim exemption from producing all the orders passed under section 144, cr.p.c.
and other orders under the suspension rules?
ii.
whether the freedom of speech and expression and freedom to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business over the internet is a part of the fundamental rights under part iii of the constitution?
iii.
whether the governments action of prohibiting internet access is valid?
iv.
whether the imposition of restrictions under section 144, cr.p.c. were valid?
v. whether the freedom of press of the petitioner in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019 was violated due to the restrictions?
d. production of orders 11.
the present petitions, their context and conduct of the parties, have placed this court in a peculiar situation.
we have been asked to go into the question of the validity of orders, restricting movement and communication, passed in the state of jammu and kashmir by various authorities, however, the orders are not before us.
the petitioners and intervenors claim that the orders were not available, which is why they could not place them on record.
12.
at the same time, while the nonavailability of orders was not denied by the respondentstate, they did not produce the said orders.
in fact, when this court by order dated 16.10.2019 asked them to produce the orders, the respondentstate placed on record only sample orders, citing difficulty in producing the numerous orders which were being withdrawn and modified on a daytoday basis.
the respondentstate also claimed that the plea to produce orders by the petitioners was an expansion of the scope of the present petitions.
13.
at the outset, a perusal of the prayers in the writ petitions before us should be sufficient to reject the aforementioned contention of the respondentstate.
in w.p. c number 1164 of 2019 and i.a number 157139 in i.a. number 139555 of 2019 in w.p. c number 1031 of 2019, a prayer has been made to issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ directing respondent numbers 1 and 2 to produce all orders by which movement of all persons has been restricted since 04.08.2019.
further, production of all orders by way of which communication has been blocked in state of jammu and kashmir has also been sought.
14.
on the obligation of the state to disclose information, particularly in a writ proceeding, this court in ram jethmalani v. union of india, 2011 8 scc 1, observed as follows 75.
in order that the right guaranteed by clause 1 of article 32 be meaningful, and particularly because such petitions seek the protection of fundamental rights, it is imperative that in such proceedings the petitioners are not denied the information necessary for them to properly articulate the case and be heard, especially where such information is in the possession of the state. emphasis supplied 15.
we may note that there are two separate types of reasoning that mandates us to order production of the orders passed by the authorities in this case.
first, article 19 of the constitution has been interpreted to mandate right to information as an important facet of the right to freedom of speech and expression.
a democracy, which is sworn to transparency and accountability, necessarily mandates the production of orders as it is the right of an individual to know.
moreover, fundamental rights itself connote a qualitative requirement wherein the state has to act in a responsible manner to uphold part iii of the constitution and not to take away these rights in an implied fashion or in casual and cavalier manner.
16.
second, there is no dispute that democracy entails free flow of information.
there is not only a normative expectation under the constitution, but also a requirement under natural law, that no law should be passed in a clandestine manner.
as lon l. fuller suggests in his celebrated article there can be no greater legal monstrosity than a secret statute.1 in this regard, jeremy bentham spoke about open justice as the keenest spur to exertion.
in the same context, james madison stated a popular government, without popular information,