--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal numbers8500-8501 of 2001 shanti sports club another appellants versus union of india others respondents with contempt petition numbers 252-253 of 2001 j u d g m
e n t g.s. singhvi, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

these appeals filed against order dated 21.8.2001 of the division bench of delhi high court whereby it refused to interfere with the central governments decision not to exercise discretion under section 48 1 of the land acquisition act, 1894 for short the act to withdraw from the acquisition of land comprised in khasra numbers35, 369/36, 37, 38, 367/21 and 365/33 of village masudpur, tehsil mehrauli, delhi are illustrative of how the litigants use the courts process for frustrating the acquisition of land for a public purpose for years together and seek equity after raising illegal construction over the acquired land under the cloak of interim order s passed by one or the other court.
background facts 2.
in the aftermath of partition of the country, lakhs of people were forced to leave their habitat, properties, trade, business, etc. in the territory which became pakistan.
most of them came and settled in northern parts of the country, particularly punjab and delhi.
out of sheer compulsion, they constructed houses, etc. without proper layouts and planning.
initially, the government did not pay much attention to the haphazard construction of houses and the growth of unplanned colonies, but with rapid increase in population of the city on account of influx of thousands of people from other parts of the country, it was realized that planned development of the capital city is sine qua non for its healthy growth.
keeping this in mind, the central government created delhi development authority dda and also set up town planning organization, which was entrusted with the task of giving advice on all matters pertaining to planning in the territory of delhi.
3. the master plan of delhi was notified in 1962.
it envisaged development of delhi in different segments, i.e., residential, commercial, institutional, industrial etc.
in a scientific and modern way.
for implementing the concept of planned development in accordance with the notified master plan, large tracts of land were acquired vide notifications dated 13.11.1959, 24.10.1961, 4.4.1964, 16.4.1964 and 23.1.1965 issued under section 4 1 of the act.
writ petitions filed by those affected by the first notification were dismissed by the high court and their appeals were dismissed by this court in the case titled aflatoon v. lt. governor of delhi 1975 4 scc 285, with a categorical finding that the planned development of delhi is a public purpose for which large tracts of land could be acquired.
4. the acquisitions made in furtherance of other notifications were also challenged by the land holders and other affected persons.
c.w.p. number963/1980 filed by one ved prakash was dismissed by the high court.
however, the special leave petition was entertained by this court and leave was granted.
5. during the pendency of the civil appeal arising out of the special leave petition filed by ved prakash and some writ petitions which were directly entertained by this court, a division bench of the high court made a reference to the full bench for considering the questions whether the acquisition proceeding should be treated as having been abandoned on account of delay in making the awards and whether more than one award can be passed in respect of the land covered by the same notification.
the full bench dismissed all the writ petitions and related miscellaneous applications vide judgment titled roshanara begum v. union of india, air 1996 delhi 206.
appeals filed against the judgment of full bench were dismissed by this court - murari v. union of india 1997 1 scc 15.
6. the land which is subject matter of these appeals was acquired vide notification dated 23.1.1965.
declaration under section 6 was published on 23.12.1968, notices under sections 9 and 10 were issued in 1976 and the award was made on 22.12.1980.
7. shri amrit lal khanna, who is said to have purchased 26 bighas of land comprised in khasra numbers35, 369/36 and 37 in village masudpur, tehsil mehrauli, delhi along with three others, namely, s shri srivastava, naresh kumar and gopal kishan from shri parmeshwar lal vide sale deed dated 31.1.1969 challenged notification dated 23.1.1965 in w.p. number1753/1980.
he also filed an application for interim relief.
by an order dated 9.12.1980, the high court restrained the respondents in the writ petition from dispossessing the petitioner.
the writ petition was finally dismissed by the full bench along with other cases.
8. while the writ petition filed by shri amrit lal khanna was pending, shri satish khosla appellant number2 in one of the appeals got registered a company in the name and style of shanti india private limited under the companies act, 1956 and a society in the name of shanti sports club under the societies registration act, 1860.
between 1990-1993, shri satish khosla appears to have entered into some arrangement agreement with shri amrit lal khanna and other land owners and got possession of land bearing khasra numbers35, 369/36, 37, 38, 367/21 and 365/33 of village masudpur, tehsil mehrauli, delhi which had already been acquired by the central government.
thereafter, he got constructed complex over the acquired land in the name of appellant number1 without even making an application to the competent authority for sanction of the building plan.
he did so because he knew that if an application for sanction of the building plan was to be made, the same would be rejected in view of the prohibition contained in section 3 of the delhi lands restrictions on transfer act, 1972 for short the 1972 act against transfer of the acquired land and the concerned authorities may stall the clandestine construction activities.
9. with a view to protect his possession of the acquired land and illegal construction raised over it, shri satish khosla filed w.p. number4777/1993 in the name of shanti sports club of which he himself was described as president and shri sunil nagar, member secretary of the club for issue of a mandamus to the central government to release the land under section 48 1 of the act.
in that petition, it was claimed that with the construction of a sports complex, the purpose of acquisition, i.e., planned development of the area has already been served.
10.
at this stage, it is appropriate to note that before filing w.p. number4777/1993, shri satish khosla got filed two suits for injunction.
the first suit bearing number3318/1991 was filed on 29.10.1991 in the name of shanti india private limited with the prayer that dda be restrained from digging the land or constructing gates on the road leading to shanti garden.
in that suit, it was pleaded that the plaintiff is a company registered under the companies act, 1956 that it purchased 38 bighas 13 biswas of land comprising in khasra numbers35, 369/36, 37, 38, 367/21 and 365/33 situated in village masudpur, tehsil mehrauli, delhi and floated shanti sports club of india which formed a cricket academy with a view to provide cricketing facility for its members.
it was then averred that on 28.10.1991, dda started digging a road, which runs from andheria modh to airport with a view to raise a wall for blocking the entire road and rendering the suit property inaccessible.
along with the suit, the plaintiff filed an application for temporary injunction.
by order dated 4.1.1992, the court permitted dda to raise the wall without obstructing the plaintiffs access to the suit property.
in the second suit bearing number1544/1993 which was filed on 13.7.1993, appellant number2 herein joined s shri atma ram and amrit lal khanna as plaintiffs and prayed that dda be restrained from dispossessing them or interfering with their possession or demolishing or sealing any part of existing structure.
the subject matter of second suit was identical to the one for which earlier suit had been instituted.
in the plaint, all the plaintiffs were described as owners of the property measuring 38 bighas 13 biswas and it was pleaded that a sports club in the name of shanti sports club of india was built by plaintiff number3, shri satish khosla.
it was alleged that officers of the dda have demolished certain structures in village kishangarh on 29.6.1993 and threatened to demolish the suit property.
in the second suit also an order of injunction was passed on 15.7.1993.
11.
after filing writ petition number4777/1993, shri satish khosla instituted third suit bearing number2865/1995 in his own name and that of shri amrit lal khanna claiming that they were bhumidars of khasra numbers35, 369/36 and 37 of village masudpur, tehsil mehrauli, delhi, total measuring 26 bighas 6 biswas that the suit property was surrounded by a boundary wall with an iron gate that plaintiff number1-satish khosla floated the shanti sports club which runs a cricket academy for its members and that the officers of the dda have threatened to demolish the boundary wall and take forcible possession of an area of about 250 sq. yds.
on the pretext that it formed part of khasra numbers460, 368 and 36, which was earmarked for construction of a dispensary.
in the third suit, the court passed an order of temporary injunction on 12.12.1995 restraining dda from dispossessing the plaintiffs or demolishing the boundary wall.
12.
by filing writ petition number4777/1993, shri satish khosla had hoped that he will be able to convince the high court to ignore the gross irregularities and illegalities committed by him in securing possession of the acquired land and raising construction over it and pass an order for protection of the existing structure and also direct the central government to release the land from acquisition on which sports complex had already been constructed, but his hopes were belied because the high court did not entertain the prayer for interim relief.
undeterred by this unexpected adverse result, shri satish khosla got filed c.m. number8269/1993 in writ petition number1753/1980 with the prayer that the government be directed to release the land from acquisition because the same has already been developed.
the full bench of the high court considered similar prayer made on behalf of other land owners, referred to the judgment of this court in gandhi grah nirman sahkari samiti limited v. state of rajasthan 1993 2 scc 662 and held .
so, even if some land has been developed by the land owner according to his own notions and may be the construction raised by him on the said land is also serving some public purpose, still that cannot be a substitute for planned development of delhi which object is visualized by the authorities.
if the public object for which the land is sought to be acquired by the authorities is justified, it cannot be frustrated because the land owner has developed the land and is utilising the land for some other public purpose.
so, this contention also does not survive in view of the law held down by the supreme court.
13.
the full bench separately dealt with writ petition number1753/1980 and c.m. number8269/1993 and dismissed the same by recording the following observations 181.
most of the points raised in this writ petition are common with the main points already discussed by us.
however, mr. g. l. sanghi, senior advocate, who appeared for the applicant in c.m. 8269/93 has urged that the land in question has been developed into a sports complex and modern amenities have been provided and it would be national waste in allowing such constructions to be demolished.
182.
it is urged that the applicant has acquired this land in 1969 before coming into force of the delhi land restrictions on transfer act, 1972 and thus, there was no bar in the transferee raising constructions.
however, it is the admitted fact that all these constructions have been raised after issuance of the notification under section 4 of the act.
these constructions have been raised obviously with complete knowledge of the fact that this land is liable to be acquired for public purpose.
it is true that transferee of the land such as the applicant is entitled to same benefits and rights as the transferor see smt.
gunwant kaur v. municipal committee, bhatinda, air 1970 sc 802 .
however, unless and until it is shown that public purpose for which the land was sought to be acquired by issuing a notification under section 4 and declaration under section 6 has elapsed, it would not be possible for this court to hold that mere fact that land has been developed by the petitioner applicant should lead to the conclusion that public purpose for which the land was sought to be acquired has been achieved.
it is pointed out to us that this particular land is required for the residential scheme of vasant kunj.
so, it cannot be said that the sports complex built up by the applicant in the land in question is in consonance with the public purpose for which the land has been earmarked in the scheme of the government.
thus, we do not think that the petitioner applicant can legally get the notification quashed on any valid grounds in the present matter.
however, the petitioner applicant is at liberty to make any representation to the authorities for getting the land released and it is for the authorities to examine whether in view of the modern sports complex having been brought into existence in the land in question could it serve the public purpose of acquiring this land for that particular scheme or the scheme is liable to be modified or amended in respect of the land in question.
however, the acquisition proceedings are not liable to be quashed on any such plea.
emphasis added 14.
in the appeals preferred against the judgment of the full bench, the land owners reiterated the prayer for issue of direction to the government to release their land by asserting that the same has already been developed by constructing factories, workshops, godowns, schools, residential houses quarters, farm houses with modern facilities and sports complex.
this court opined that the constructions raised by the appellants would be regarded as unauthorized because no sanction or permission is shown to have been obtained from the competent authority.
the court then referred to an earlier judgment in state of u.p. v. pista devi 1986 4 scc 251 and rejected the prayer for release of land by making the following observations- some of the learned counsel for the appellants also submitted that even the land shown in green colour in the master plan which has been sought to be acquired but it is not understood as to for what purpose the said land is being acquired.
it was also submitted that there are a large number of structures and complexes raised on the land sought to be acquired in which schools, sports and other recreational activities are going on.
shri g.l. sanghi, learned counsel appearing for the appellants in civil appeal arising out of slp c number 5771 of 1996 and civil appeal arising out of slp c number 740 of 1996 as well as other advocates appearing for some other appellants submitted that there exist factories, workshops, godowns and mcd school besides residential houses and quarters over the land belonging to the appellant partap singh situated at roshanara road, sabzi mandi, delhi which has been acquired and that there exists modern and well-developed farmhouse with modern facilities in the land belonging to the appellant roshanara begum, where there are a good number of other structures and fruit-bearing trees.
consequently these areas do not require further development as they are already developed and, therefore, the said land should be released from acquisition.
mr sanghi, learned counsel appearing for some of the appellants urged that the appellant concerned had developed a sports complex providing modern amenities therein and if the same is demolished it would be a great national waste.
it was, therefore, urged that such complexes and built-up areas should be deleted from the acquisition.
it may be pointed out that in the master plan the land indicated in green colour is reserved for recreational facilities.
the recreational facilities are also part of the planned development of delhi and it cannot be disputed that recreational amenities are also part of the life of the people and an important feature of a developed society.
therefore, no legitimate objection can be made in the acquisition of such land which is shown in green colour.
so far as the structures and constructions made on the land are concerned there is no material to show that they were made before the issuance of notification under section 4 of the act.
it is also not clear whether such constructions were raised with or without necessary sanction approval of the competent authority.
no grievance therefore can legitimately be raised in that behalf as the same would be regarded as unauthorised and made at the risk of the landowners.
here a reference of a decision of this court in the case of state of u.p. v. pista devi may be made with advantage, para 7 of which reads as under scc p. 258, para 7 it was next contended that in the large extent of land acquired which was about 412 acres there were some buildings here and there and so the acquisition of these parts of the land on which buildings were situated was unjustified since those portions were not either waste or arable lands which could be dealt with under section 17 1 of the act.
this contention has not been considered by the high court.
we do not, however, find any substance in it.
the government was not acquiring any property which was substantially covered by buildings.
it acquired about 412 acres of land on the outskirts of meerut city which was described as arable land by the collector.
it may be true that here and there there were a few super-structures.
in a case of this nature where a large extent of land is being acquired for planned development of the urban area it would not be proper to leave the small portions over which some superstructures have been constructed out of the development scheme.
in such a situation where there is real urgency it would be difficult to apply section 5-a of the act in the case of few bits of land on which some structures are standing and to exempt the rest of the property from its application.
in the present case also a large extent of land measuring thousands of acres has been acquired and, therefore, it would not be proper to leave out some small portions here and there over which some structures are said to be constructed out of the planned development of delhi.
we may, however, add here that during the course of the arguments shri goswami, learned counsel appearing for the respondents-state made a statement that the government will consider each of the structures and take a decision in that respect.
we, therefore, leave this issue to the discretion of the respondent.
emphasis added 15.
by taking cue from the observations made by the high court in last portion of paragraph 182 of its judgment and the statement made by the states counsel before this court, which finds mention in the last part of para 21 of the judgment reported in 1999 1 scc 15, a representation was made on behalf of appellant number1 on 3.10.1997 to various functionaries of the government and dda for release of the land under section 48 1 of the act on the ground that several parcels of the acquired land have already been released in favour of hamdard public school, st. xavier school, sahabad state extension welfare association, village pul pehlad ten mehrauli and sahabad daulatpur.
another representation was made on 3.6.1999 for release of the land covered by the sports complex.
these representations were considered in the meeting held in the office of the then minister for urban development which was attended among others by the president of shanti sports club and vice chairman of dda and a decision is said to have been taken to de-notify the land in question and for regularization thereof in favour of appellant number1.
the president of appellant number1 is said to have been asked to discuss the matter with the official of the dda for working out the terms of regularization.
on 8.6.1999, the private secretary to the then urban development minister sought a report from the commissioner of planning, delhi development authority in order to enable the honble minister to take appropriate decision.
on the same day, the concerned minister recorded the following note in the file- extensive construction has taken place.
this must be with full cooperation of the public servants concerned.
in accordance with the settled policy, no demolition can or will be ordered.
at the last meeting, i indicated that suitable terms of regularization be settled by negotiations.
i would leave this now to my successor.
16.
the issue was then considered by the successor minister in the urban development department, who finally decided on 14.7.1999 that the land covered by the sports complex cannot be released because the development on the land was made after completion of the acquisition proceedings and making of the award and also because the land was needed for vasant kunj residential project.
this decision was communicated to the appellants vide letter dated 9.6.2000, which reads as under- numberj-13039/1/95/ddib, vol-ii government of india, ministry of urban development poverty alleviation, delhi division nirman bhawan, new delhi.
dated 9th june, 2000 to shri satish khosla, president, shanti sports club, shanti sports complex, vasant kung, new delhi-110 070.
sub de-notification of shanti sports club land comprising 50 bighas 12 biswas in respect of land bearing khasra number 367/21 1-10 , 32 8-05 , 355/33 3-07 , 35 5-19 , 369/36 11-14 , 37 8-13 , 38 min 7-0 and 354/33 4-04 .
sir, i am directed to refer to your representation dated 3.6.99 submitted to this ministry representation dated 8.6.99 enclosed as annexure to the writ petition on the above mentioned subject and to say that the matter has been examined in consultation with dda.
the development on the land has taken place after the acquisition of land was completed and award was declared.
the land has been acquired for the vasant kunj residential project which has been held up due to prolonged litigation.
apart from these the honble high court in cwp number 1753/80 filed by shri amrit lal khanna and subsequently the honble supreme court have upheld the acquisition proceedings in favour of the government.
2. therefore, it has been decided that your request to denotify the above land cannot be acceded as the land is required for public purpose.
this is for your information.
3. this issues with approval of the competent authority.
yours faithfully, sd - r.c. nayak under secretary ddva 17.
the appellants challenged the aforementioned decision of the government in writ petition number3277/2000 mainly on the following grounds 1. that on 8th june, 1999, the then minister for urban development had taken final decision for de-notification of the land and regularization thereof in favour of appellant number1 and his successor could not have overturned that decision.
2. the decision contained in letter dated june 9, 2000 is totally devoid of reasons inasmuch as while refusing to release the land in question in favour of appellant number1, the government did not take into account the fact that a huge sports complex had been built by spending substantial amount and demolition thereof would be injurious to vast section of the people which was benefited by the facilities available in the sports complex.
3. that similar representations made for release of land were entertained and accepted by the government, but without any rhyme and reason, the appellants were discriminated and in this manner, their right to equality guaranteed under article 14 of the constitution has been violated.
18. in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the union of india, it was averred that the alleged transfer of land in favour of the petitioners is contrary to the provisions of the 1972 act and is, therefore, void that no decision was taken by the then minister on 8.6.1999 for release of land covered by the sports complex and that the representation was finally rejected on 14.7.1999 because the land was required for public purpose, namely, the vasant kunj residential project.
on the issue of release of other parcels of land, it was pleaded that each case is decided on its merits depending on the use to which the land is to be put and various other factors and release of some land under section 48 1 of act does not create a right in favour of other land owners to seek a direction for release of their land.
19. in a separate counter affidavit filed on behalf of dda, details of various litigious ventures undertaken by the writ petitioners, amrit lal khanna and atma ram were given and it was pleaded that the petitioners are not entitled for relief because they appear to have entered into some transaction with the land owners in violation of the negative mandate contained in section 3 of the 1972 act against transfer of the acquired land and also because by taking advantage of interim order passed in writ petition number1753/1980, they raised illegal construction.
in para 5 of the counter affidavit it was averred that the construction was made in clear violation of the existing master plan.
it was further averred that even in the master plan of 2001, the permitted use of the land in question is partly residential and partly rural that residential portion of the land is to be used for vasant kunj residential scheme of dda, which was held up due to protective orders of injunction passed by different courts and that in the rural zone, only rural centre, public and semi public facilities, orchards, plants, nurseries, wireless and transmission, forest and extractive industries and lnp are permitted.
20.
the division bench of the high court heard writ petition number4777 of 1993 along with writ petition number3277 of 2000 and dismissed both the writ petitions after threadbare consideration of various issues raised by the parties.
the division bench referred to the notings recorded in the file in the context of representations made by the appellants including note dated 8.6.1999 recorded by the then minister for urban development leaving the matter to his successor and observed .we fail to appreciate the argument advanced on behalf of the petitioners that the then minister had taken a final decision to regularise and denotify the land in favour of the petitioners.
assuming for the sake of argument that on june 3, 1999 and june 8, 1999 a decision to denotify and regularize the land was taken by the then minister for urban development, it seems to us that such a decision will be of no consequence and will have no existence in the eye of law.
this is so because the terms for denotification and regularization were not settled.
settlement, if any, was left for the future.
in the event of the parties failing to reach a settlement there would be no occasion to withdraw from acquisition of the land and to regularize the same in favour of the petitioners.
we also fail to appreciate as to how it can be argued that though the terms for regularization were still to be settled, the decision to regularise the land in favour of the first petitioner was taken by sh.
ram jethmalani.
the argument advanced on behalf of the petitioners, therefore, is fallacious and is hereby rejected.
besides, the withdrawal from acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken is governed by section 48 of the act.
undoubtedly, section 48 vests power in the government to withdraw from acquisition except in the case provided for in section 36 thereof.
but withdrawal from acquisition must necessarily be by a notification under sub-section 1 of section 48 of the act published in the official gazette.
21.
the division bench held that the construction made over the acquired land has to be treated as unauthorised because the same was raised in violation of various statutory provisions.
the division bench then referred to master plan, 2001 in which land use of the area in question was shown partly residential and partly rural and observed that use of the land by the petitioner-club for recreational purposes is unauthorized.
the division bench observed that if the land is regularised in favour of the petitioner-club, then the land use will have to be first changed from rural to recreational and for that purpose master plan would require amendment in accordance with section 11 a of the delhi development act, 1957, which provides for issuance of a notice inviting objections and suggestions with respect to the proposed modification and consideration thereof by dda and central government.
22.
the division bench also considered the argument that as per the lay out plan of the vasant kunj, only 11 bighas 14 biswas was required for the housing scheme and the petitioners are prepared to part with that portion of the land and rejected the same by recording the following observations- respondent number5 in his counter affidavit dated august 5, 2000 has clearly stated that the land is required for development schemes of the dda.
it is pointed out that because of the illegal construction made by the petitions during the operation of the restraint orders the housing scheme of the dda has been held up resulting in loss to the public.
the affidavit also alludes to the fact that the land for peripheral road in sector d-7 and land meant for primary school and dispensary has been encroached upon by the petitions.
according to the affidavit, the permitted land use in the area is as follows- 1 partly residential. 2 partly for rural use.
the affidavit goes on to state that the technical committee of the dda has mooted a proposal for change of land use from rural use to residential use, keeping in view the need of lakhs of applicants who are on the waiting list for allotment of flats.
the recommendation of the technical committee is stated to have been accepted by the dda and a resolution has been passed recommending change of user of 23.08 hectares of land behind d-6, vasant kunj from rural to residential use.
in view of the categorical stand of the dda that the land is needed for housing project, the argument of the petitioners that only 11 bighas and 14 biswas was required for residential use fails.
it has been noticed by the supreme court in murari vs. union of india supra that there is inflow of more than one lakh people every year to the city.
it is also noted that delhi is an ever expanding cosmopolitan, commercial and industrial city where millions of multifarious, national and international activities take place.
the supreme court also noticed that the city is confronted with serious housing problems.
as a sequitur, it was found that planned development of delhi is a continuous and unending process.
therefore, we cannot find fault with the decision of the government declining to release the land from acquisition.
23. in the concluding part of its order, the division bench took cognizance of written statement filed by satish khosla, president of club in suit number3064/1996 titled as m s eli lilly ranbaxy limited and others v. satish khosla wherein, the plaintiff had sought a decree of permanent injunction, restraining the defendant from letting out garden for functions and parties during the currency of lease agreement entered by and between m s eli lilly ranbaxy limited and shri satish khosla in respect of cottage number6.
the division bench noted that in paragraphs 4, 6 and 11 of the written statement, the defendant had unequivocally given out that the premises are being used not only for sporting activities but for wedding parties, birthday parties and other festive occasions and cottages constructed in the premises were being given to the affluent parties like the plaintiff, several diplomats including deputy high commissioner of pakistan, ambassador of kazakastan, that huge rent and other charges were being collected by the defendant from the plaintiff which ran into lacs of rupees and opined that the claim of the petitioner that the complex was being used for recreation of the members only was fallacious.
24.
on the issue of discrimination, the division bench held that even if some other lands have been de-notified under section 48 1 , the same would be contrary to the purpose of acquisition and one wrong cannot justify another wrong.
25.
shri mukul rohtagi, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants argued with his usual vehemence that the decision taken by the then minister for urban development on 8.6.1999 for regularization of the construction made on the land in question was final and his su