--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner charles.
k. skaria vs. respondent dr.c.mathew date of judgment19/03/1980 bench krishnaiyer, v.r. bench krishnaiyer, v.r. pathak, r.s. citation 1980 air 1230 1980 scr 3 71 1980 scc 2 752 act constitution of india 1950, articles 14 and 15- admission to post graduate degree and diploma course in medicine-reservation quota of 2 of total number of seats for candidates from entire country minus kerala-such reservation-whether valid.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

headnote the kerala state runs three medical colleges with post- graduate degree and diploma courses in two of its universities trivandrum and calicut .
the selection is made from among candidates guided by the prospectus issued in this behalf and the selection committee makes the selection.
the principal of the medical college, trivandrum, being the convener thereof.
a notification inviting applications was published in the gazette dated 27-2-1979 wherein the last date for receipt of application for the post graduate course in ophthalmology was set down as march 31, 1979.
candidates were considered on the basis of their merit, marks being allotted for various attributes including military service, membership of the scheduled castes and tribes, and holding of medical diplomas.
the competitive marks provided for 10 to diploma holders in the selection of candidates to m.s. and m.d. courses in the respective subjects or sub- specialities.
the kerala state provided a quota of 2 of the total number of seats for candidates from the entire country minus kerala.
while clause 12 of the prospectus frowned upon late and or defective applications, clause 13 provided that attested copies of the statement of marks at each professional examination and those of other documents should be attached with every application.
the special secretary to the state government in a communication to the selection committee informed that as the result of the diploma course conducted by the medical college, trivandrum would not be available before the last date for the receipt of applications, 10 weightage may be given to the concerned applicants, subject to the condition of production of the diploma certificate before finalisation of the selection to the post-graduate course.
the number of seats for the post-graduate degree course in ophthalmology available for the year 1979-80 was six of which one belonged to schedule caste scheduled tribe candidate, another to a tutor working in a medical college.
the state was left with four seats.
in the writ petition, the high court held that one of the students, dr. gopinathan nair, was so meritorious that none challenged his admission, and that there was no inherent lacuna or illegality in the communication ex p 3 of the special secretary to the selection committee.
in appeal, the full bench of the high court, allowed the appeal holding that ex p 3 cannot have the effect of over-riding the effect of clauses 12 and 13 of the prospectus and quashed the selections made on the basis of the rank list for admission.
in the appeals to this court on the question whether the 2 reservation for the entire countrys candidate population from outside kerala in the open merit pool, was valid, 72 held 1. principled policy, consistent with constitutional imperatives articles 14 and 15 must guide admissions to courses in higher professional education but governments and universities, not infrequently take liberties with this larger obligation under provincial pressures and institutional compulsions and seek asylum in reluctant pragmatism mindless of hostility to constitutionality.
nothing is more harrowing for the court, with increasing litigation and thereby forced in to slow motion and unwilling to intervene in an administrative area than to hamper the strategic stages of educational process like admission and examinations, but the justice system cannot run away from hearing and deciding questions of unconstitutionality, especially when educational authorities shape policies, change rules and make peace with the crisis of the hour, ignoring the parameters of the national charter.
mistrust of government, is violative of comity between instrumentalities and is not permissible unless substantiated by facts.
suspicion is the upas tree under whose shade reason fails and justice dies.
high court has thrown the academic year in post-graduate ophthalmology into disarray and even wastage.
74 f-h, 77 g-h 2. welfare-oriented judicial process must be constructive in its objective, must be geared to order as its goal and must pave the way for resultant contentment, avoiding negative writs which, in practice, prove to be congealing commands.
78 d-e 3. in the instant case, the high court, on the crucial question, has correctly stated the law regard denial of opportunity for outsiders and consequently found the admission to the courses all wrong, but through its judgment, has jettisoned students who are half-way through their courses and directed fresh admissions on new policies yet to be evolved, with little chance of any one getting through the examinations or even admissions during this academic year.
78 e-f 3.
whatever might be the passion for correct law and provocation on account of governmental indifference, the court must use its power to correct error and promote order and not strike down an illegal error without going forward to affirmative action which may minimise injury generally.
the judicial process, in its creative impulse, must hesitate to scuttle, salvage wherever possible and destroy only when the situation is beyond retrieval.
79 d-e 4. the scheme of reservation or a paltry 2 for candidates in the whole country outside the two universities of the state has not been substantiated as a sufficient fulfillment of articles 14 and 15.
fundamental rights of candidates do not depend on the grace of governments and indians are not, aliens in their own motherland when asking for seats on the score of equal opportunity.
a host of good reasons may weigh with the state in formulating prefences, reservations and other cases of choice provided they do not outrage arts.
14 and 15, or promote the process of equalisation as a dynamic phase of equality.
what is paramount is equal opportunity for each.
81 d-f state of kerala v. v. m. thomas, 1976 2 s.c.c.
310 referred to.
5. law in action being a healing art, the court must strive to avoid driving out the students half-way through their course and to see that no costly seat for advanced studies in which the community as a whole has a stake is wasted.
the court should not give up the search for alternatives.
82 e-f 6.
there is nothing unreasonable nor arbitrary in adding 10 marks for holders of a diploma.
but to earn this extra 10 marks, the diploma must be 73 obtained at least on or before the last date for application, nor later.
proof of having obtained a diploma is different from the factum of having got it.
it is prudent to produce evidence of the diploma alongwith the application, but that is secondary.
relaxation of the date on the first is illegal, not so on the second.
academic excellence, through a diploma for which extra marks is granted, cannot be denuded because proof is produced only later, yet before the date of actual selection.
the emphasis is on the diploma, the proof thereof subserves the factum of possession of the diploma and is not an independent factor.
84 d-f 7. when a statute vests a public power and conditions the manner of exercise of that power then the law insists on that mode of exercise alone.
it is unconcerned with that rule.
a method of convenience for proving possession of a qualification is merely directory.
moreover, the prospectus itself permits government to modify the method.
there is nothing objectionable with the government directive to the selection committee, nor in the communication to the selection committee by the university, nor even in their taking into consideration and giving credit for diplomas although the authentic copies of the diplomas were not attached to the application for admission.
86 a-c 8.
much of hardship and harassment in administration flows from overemphasis on the external rather than the essential.
the government and the selection committee rightly treated as directory not mandatory the mode of proving the holding of diplomas and as mandatory the actual possession of the diploma.
the frustrating delay in getting copies of degree was by-passed by the state government by two steps.
government informed the selection committee that even if they got proof or marks only after the last date for applications but before the date for selections they could be taken note of and secondly the registrars of the universities informed officially which of the candidates had passed in the diploma course.
the selection committee did not violate any mandatory rule nor act arbitrarily by accepting and acting upon these steps.
86 d-g 9.
the three candidates who had been eventually admitted by the selection committee could not be ousted merely for the reason that the certificate of diploma had not been produced together with the application for admission.
nor, indeed, could government be faulted for issuing a directive to the selection committee that applications from students of the diploma course could be considered subject to the condition that they would produce the diploma certificate before finalising the selection to post-graduate course.
87 a-b 10.
though appellant number i has no legal claim to a seat, the overall circumstances merit compassionate consideration and the court directed.
the kerala university and the indian medical council directed to permit him to complete his course by adding one more seat, for this year only, to the ophthalmic degree course.
marginal adjustments by increasing one seat more is possible without injury to academic efficiency.
88 f-h 11. directed that the state of kerala and the principal of the trivandrum medical college, who is the convener of the selection committee, as well as the two universities concerned, admit into the post-graduate ophthalmology course dr. naomi and dr. gopal krishnan for this year.
the two applicants will be accorded admission on their reporting within ten days.
91 e-d state of kerala v. kum.
t. p. roshana 1972 2 scr 974 a. periakaruppan v. state of tamilnadu 1971 3 scr 449 referred to.
74 12.
the 2 open seats for the candidates from all the universities of india outside kerala runs counter to the constitutional directive of equal opportunity and the preambuler emphasis on national integrity.
the state will do well to fashion a formula in terms of the guidelines given by this court in dr. jagdish sarans v. union of india and others, 1980 2 s.c.r.
831 91a-g judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal numbers641-644 of 1980.
appeals by special leave from the judgment and order dated 10-12-1979 of the kerala high court number w.a. number 22/79, w.a. number 245/79 and o.p. number 1586/79.
p. govindan nair and a. s.nambiar for the appellants in c. a. number 641 to 643/80.
m.m. abdul khader and v.j. francis for the appellant in c.a. number 644/80.
t.s. krishnamoorthy iyer and n. sudhakaran for the respondent number 1 in c.as.
numbers 641 to 644/80.
the judgment of the court was delivered by krishna iyer j., the universities in the country are often among the contributaries to the flood of litigation in the higher courts of the country.
this pathological condition, to which the healing attention of the nations educational leadership.
the above appeals before us present challenges to the scheme of admission to post graduate courses in medicine in the colleges of the kerala state.
but since that state is not alone in the tendency to temporarian with constitutional values and writ petitions for college admissions are almost a hardly annual, we deem it our duty to permit ourselves a few preliminary observations before proceeding to the fact-situation and conflict-resolution.
principled policy, consistent with constitutional imperatives arts.
14 and 15 must guide admissions to courses in higher professional education but government and universities, not infrequently take liberties with this larger obligation under provincial pressures and institutional compulsions and seek asylum in reluctant pragmatism mindless of hostility to constitutionality.
nothing is more harrowing for the court, over-burdened with increasing litigation and thereby forced into slow motion, and unwilling to intervene in an administrative area, than to hamper the strategic stages of educational processes like admissions and examinations, but the justice system cannot run away from hearing and deciding questions of unconstitutionality, especially when educational authorities shape policies, change rules and make peace with the crisis of the hour, ignoring the parameters of the national charter.
we make these observations driven by the painful experience of facing this situation year after year, from state after state.
if higher education bids farewell to national vision and equal opportunity-the two fundamental criticisms levelled before us in these cases-what hope is there for constitutionalism save surrender to provincialism and lobby power leaving the fortunes of students of advanced learning to litigative astrology annually ?
a national consensus on this issue is long over-due and we venture to suggest that the union of india will actively involve the academic community and the states, and put the problem on the urgent national agenda and reach solutions constitutionally permissible and agreeable to the genius of the states vis-a-vis post- graduate courses.
no state nor university can despise the constitution nor leave in inglorious uncertainty or myopic ad hocism the career of its talented human resources.
back to the facts.
the kerala state runs three medical colleges with post-graduate degree and diploma courses in two of its universities trivandrum and calicut.
the selection is made from among candidates guided by the prospectus issued in this behalf and the selection committee makes the selection, the principal of the medical college, trivandrum, being the convener hereof.
a notification inviting applications was published in the gazette dated 27- 2-1979 wherein the last date for receipt of applications was set down as march, 31, 1979.
candidates were considered on the basis of their merit, but the concept of merit was broadened in such manner that marks were allotted for various attributes including military service, membership of the scheduled castes and tribes, and, were relevant to the point raised in the present case, holding of medical diploma.
one of the post-graduate courses offered by two of the colleges is in ophthalmology and we are concerned directly with the competitive claims among the candidates for this course only.
right at the outset, we wish to make it clear that we confined ourselves to the comparative merits of the candidates for the post graduate degree course in ophthalmology and do not wish to disturb any other course lest there should be upsets beyond what we intend.
the competitive marks admittedly provided for 10 to diploma-holders in the selection of candidates to m.s. and m.d. courses in the respective subjects or subspecialities.
we are not concerned with the other aspects of the selection process such as percentages in favour of candidates belonging to the scheduled castes and tribes 10 .
again, 20 of the seats were set apart for the teaching staff in the medical colleges.
one of the bones of contention between the parties in the high court related to candidates from universities outside kerala.
articles 14 and 15 do not recognise state frontiers or the cult of the sons of the soil, if we may speak generally and over-simplistically.
the necessary implication of the constitutional mandate is that every basic degree- holder who fills the bill can apply for admission for post- graduate courses.
but the kerala state, in its wisdom, provided a niggardly quota of 2 of the total number of seats for candidates from the entire country minus kerala- not a catholic approach informed by nationalist generosity, if we may say so with some trepedition.
by way of aside we may observe that other states, observed with provincial impulses, are equally parsimonious is no validation of a violation of law, if it be so.
anyway, the prospectus provided that instead of open competition, 2 of the seats under general merit are set apart for candidates coming from out side universities other than kerala and calicut.
another facet of the forensic right before the high court needs to be mentioned before we proceed to a formulation of the issues debated in this court.
while clause 12 of the prospectus frowns upon late and or defective applications, clause 13 states certificates to be produced-in all cases true copies of the following documents have to be produced- xx xx xx k any other certificates required along with the application.
clause 13 in the form of application for admission contains an explanation which deserves mention in this context nb attested copies of the statement of marks at each professional examination and those of other documents should be attached with every application.
here also specify whether a diploma holder or having military service or rural service and also whether certificates to this effect have been produced. emphasis added while the prospectus is a fairly comprehensive repository of the directions issued by the state government in regard to the selection of candidates, the opening passage in paragraph 4 thereof contains the following statement the selection of candidates will be made according to g.o. ms. 280/76/hd dated 14-7-1976 as modified from time to time which shall be deemed to have incorporated ibid this power to modify is not arbitrary and can be exercised only reasonably .
apparently in exercise of this power and making a realistic appraisal of the examination-situation in the calicut and kerala universities, the special secretary to government issued a communication to the selection committee, the operative portion whereof has relevance to the discussion that is to follow it is noted that the result of the diploma course conducted in medical college, calicut will be published before the last date for the receipt of application to the post-graduate course, while the result of the students of medical college, trivandrum will not be available before the last date for receipt of application to post-graduate course.
thus the students of medical college trivandrum are placed at a disadvantage, i am therefore to inform you that it has been decided that applications from the students of the diploma course, trivandrum may also be considered and that 10 weightage may be given to the post graduate students of diploma course in medical college trivandrum, subject to the condition that they will produce the diploma certificate before finalising the selection to post-graduate course.
the learned single judge who had specially examined the government file in this connection, with an eye on the legitimacy of the processes involved and the sufficiency of the notings and consultations made, came to the conclusion that the communication never represented the decision of the government and was in conformity with secretariat practice.
the learned single judge summed up his view thus there is thus no inherent lacuna or illegality in the proceedings which led to ext.
p3.
i hold that ext.
p3 was validly issued.
nothing presented to us persuades to a contrary view although we may presently advert to what, with a slant, the full bench of the high court had to say, in appeal, on this aspect of the matter.
mistrust of government, implicit in the judgment of the full bench in appeal, is violative of comity between instrumentalities and is not permissible unless substantiated by facts.
it has beer well said that suspicion is the upas tree under whose shade reason fails and justice dies.
we permit ourselves these observations only because the learned chief justice who spoke for the full bench did use words which did not indict but did suspect we wish to record that it was stated for respondents 4 and 5 in w.a. number 222 and 245 of 1979 that the marks of the diploma test were communicated to the principals on before the last date for receipt of applications and received by them on 31-3-1979.
there was nothing to show whether the communication was an open or an authenticated one and we are doubtful to say no more whether at acquisition of qualification for eligibility and weightage, subsequent to the last date for application can save an applicant who did not have these on the said date.
we are clear that ext.
p3 cannot have the effect of overriding the effect of clauses 12 and 13 k of the prospectus. emphasis supplied we will scan the soundness of this criticism in due course.
it is fair to state now that we have sketched the backdrop, what the further facts are and what the high courts verdict is.
we may abbreviate the narration because we substantially agree with the main legal point decided by the high court.
regrettably, its ultimate direction has thrown the academic year in post-graduate ophthalmology into disarray and even wastage.
welfare-oriented judicial process must be constructive in its objective, must be geared to order as its goal and must pave the way for resultant contentment, avoiding negative writs which, in practice, prove to be congealing commands.
indeed, the high court, on the crucial question, has more or less correctly stated the law regarding denial of opportunity for outsiders and consequently found the admission to the courses all wrong, but through its judgment, has jettisoned students who are half-way through their courses and directed fresh admissions on new policies yet to be evolved, with little chance of any one getting through the examinations or even admissions during this academic year consistently with the university regulations and governmental tardiness.
we cannot countenance such negativity without some effort at rescue through the court writ since a whole year of ophthalmology study at the post-graduate level may well be lost to the state, what with the enormous investment in running such courses that the universities have laid out and the peoples need for such specialists.
the full bench decision of the high court, in its ultimate effect, has left behind it a fallout of demolition as a result of our above discussion and conclusion we allow n.a. number 222 of 1979 and set aside the judgment of the learned judge and the rank list for admission to the post-graduate courses in ophthalmology, and quash the selections made on the basis of the said list.
we were rather distressed at having to quash the selections of budding youngsters to the specialised courses.
such thoughts prevailed with us in the full bench decision in state of kerala and anr.
v. rafia rahim 1978 klt 369 .
while the petitioners in those cases won the battle, they were denied the fruits of victory.
we see no ground for a repetition of the same treatment to the petitioners before us.
particularly it is so, because some of them had filed the writ petitions before the selections, and some had obtained interim orders that the selections shall be finalised only subject to the result of the writ petitions in this court.
we cannot lightly pass over these aspects.
we would accordingly quash the selections made and directly a fresh selection to the courses, in accordance with law and in the light of the observation contained in this judgment.
whatever might be the passion for correct law and provocation on account of governmental indifference, the court, in our view, must use its power to correct error and promote order and not strike down an illegal error without going forward to affirmative action which may minimise injury generally.
indeed, the judicial process, in its creative impulse, must hesitate to scuttle, salvage wherever possible and destroy only when the situation is beyond retrieval-life-giving facts forgotten by the high court when quashing the admissions for the year.
this positive perspective justifies the final direction that we issue in the concluding para of this judgment, if we may anticipate the nature of the relief we have moulded.
some more facts may now be narrated merely to illumine the ground on which we are disposing of these appeals.
indeed, our anxiety to hasten the pace of justice and reduce the damage to the courses under way has persuaded us into hearing full arguments at the earliest stage conceivable.
having recently discussed a similar issue in dr. jagadish sarans case we desist from elaborately examining the merits of one of the major issues raised here.
abridged facts, condensed examination and brief directions will suffice, although arguments have been full and helpful.
the number of seats for the post-graduate degree course in ophthalmology available for the year 1979-80 was six, of which one belonged to a scheduled caste scheduled tribe candidate, another to a tutor working in a medical college.
the state was left with four seats.
the high court has clarified that one of the students, dr. gopinathan nair, was so meritorious that none challenged his admission.
three seats and six contenders, was the musical chair scenario.
the story thus begins with three seats for post- graduate ophthalmology and the whole exercise is confined to allotment of these seats in conformity with the equal opportunity rule which is constitutionally inviolable.
the selection committee, acting on the guidelines, had to award 10 marks extra for those who had a post-graduate diploma-a reasonable recognition of an additional accomplishment relevant to the object of excellence in the post-graduate degree course.
so, no one has attacked the propriety of this addition.
on the contrary, both sides have relied on this qualification, the battle being over the subsidiary issue of whether the appellants before us, whose admission to the courses has been undone by the high court were entitled to reckon in their favour the possession of a diploma the certificate for which was issued to them only after the last date for applications for the post-graduate degree.
we will presently state the events which give rise to this argument.
right or wrong, the selection committee did admit three students who undoubtedly possessed diplomas and, if the marks eligible on that score were to be tacked on, the selections were unassailable except at the instance of candidates from universities outside kerala and one of whom did successfully challenge the selections before the high court.
had the final shape of the high courts order been left intact it would have meant that all those doing their course would be out and the elaborate process of framing fresh rules would involve discussion and debate, consultation and formulation, and then invitation for applications, only to find that, at the end of this excursion, everybody has missed the bus since time does not stand still until government implements the high courts will.
the major target of attack before the high court was the 2 reservation for the entire countrys candidate population from outside kerala in what was called the open merit pool.
the reason for the nullification of the parsimonious percentage for outside candidates in the open merit pool has peen stated by the high court thus despite our anxiety, we are afraid we cannot salvage the principle of selection introduced by the government under clause 5 c as amounting to a rational classifi- cation based on intelligible differentia having a rational nexus with the object sought to be served.
whether intentionally or otherwise, it strikes us as clever device to oust the outside university graduates from the general merit pool and to confine them to an illusory scheme of reservations.
we have dealt with the policy of institutional reservations paring down the availability of seats for candidates from other universities, in dr. jagadish sarans case supra .
although in that decision we ultimately desisted from striking down the formula adopted by the delhi university with a view to avoiding a stalemate for the year, we did direct that university to reconsider the whole problem of admissions and reservations in terms of arts.
14 and 15 and concretise the constitutional guidelines in that behalf.
having regard to the ratio in the above case, we are not inclined to reverse the view of the full bench of the kerala high court in the judgment under appeal in so far as it has taken the view extracted above.
even so, we feel the need to pursue the matter further because we must design the relief with the least disturbance and not annul the course for the year as a legal consequence.
the scheme of reservation of a paltry 2 for candidates in the whole country outside the two universities of the state has not been substantiated as sufficient fulfillment of arts.
14 and 15.
fundamental rights of candidates do not depend on the grace of governments and indians are not aliens in their own motherland when asking for seats on the score of equal opportunity.
a host of good reasons may weigh with the state in formulating preferences, reservations and other cases of choice provided they do not outrage arts.
14 and 15, or, indeed, as suggested by this court in the thomas case may promote the process of equalisation as a dynamic phase of equality.
what is paramount is equal opportunity for each.
the government, in its wisdom, made provision for scheduled castes tribes, backward classes, students from the colleges of kerala and other categories and, after working out these enclaves of exclusivism and immunity from national competition on sheer merit, wound up with a magnificent 2 of the total seats by way of homage to equal opportunity open to all indian candidates put together less kerala candidates .
can it be that, while sloganising against the parochial doctrine of sons of the soil, states policy in higher education does not concede more than 2 to indian candidates qua indians who are not otherwise sheltered by the dykes of reservations ?
the high court was obviously dissatisfied with the governmental policy of 2 for open seats which was more a mockery of national integrity, read with equal opportunity, than a sincere respect for the foundational faith enshrined in arts.
14 and 15.
you cannot lay wreath and claim to garland if we may put the point in poignant imagery.
therefore, the high court struck down the formula for selection because it regarded that a higher proportion of seats for all in open competition was a constitutional necessity.
we do not delve into this aspect at greater length or scan the pros and cons of the point canvassed because we have already decided in dr. jagadish saran and ors.
v. union of india supra what guidelines should govern admissions to medical colleges at the higher levels.
we, therefore, do not propose to interfere with the holding of the high court that 2 for outsiders is not sustainable in law.
but, we must, even here, caution the kerala state that an enlightened policy of admission to institutions of higher studies in harmony with the constitution must be formulated if it is not to be guilty of contributing to the confusion in college campuses and student litigation which paralyse educational life.
even though we desist from demolishing the reasoning of the high court on the trivial 2, we cannot appreciate the negative stance or note of nullity adopted in the final relief.
remedial jurisprudence is benign judge power.
law in action being a healing art, we must strive to avoid driving out the students half-way through their course and to see that no costly seat for advanced studies in which the community as a whole has a stake is wasted.
we do not think the court should give up the search for alternatives.
actually, we persuaded counsel on both sides to make a constructive approach.
so viewed, it became feasible for us to reach a reasonable and viable solution to the problem, as will be presently explained.
in conclusion, we agree with the high court that 2 in the merit pool for outside candidates is not shown to be rational and so the outsider candidates to use the high courts expression should have been considered even beyond 2.
but how far and under what conditions is for the state to consider. see dr. jagdish saran, supra .
now we come up against the other limb of the argument which appealed to the high court.
the three candidates already admitted to the ophthalmology course secured their seats on the basis of diploma marks.
had they no diplomas they would have been screened out.
the high court has taken the view that the diplomas of the appellants should have been excluded from consideration by the selection committee.
why?
the ground is given by the full bench in appeal thus under clause 13 k of the application form, which we have extracted earlier, all certificates required had to be produced with the application.
clause 12 enjoins summary rejection for non-complian