--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner air india statutory corporation.
vs. respondent united labour union ors.
date of judgment 06/11/1996 bench k. ramaswamy, b.l. hansaria, s.b. majmudar act headnote judgment the 6th day of december, 1996.
present honble mr. justice k. ramaswamy honble mr. justice b.l. hansaria honble mr. justice s.b. majmudar ashok deasai, attorney general, t.r. andhyarujuna, solicitor general, p.p. malhotra, ms. indira jaising, k.k. singhvi, sr.
advs., m.d. sisodia, k. swamy, lalit bhasin, ms. nina gupta, ms. kiran bhardwaj, vineet kr., ms. ethel pereira, ms. ritu makkar, p.p. singh, g. nagesware reddy, c.v.s.
rao ms. anil katiyar, ms. anita shenoi, sanjay parikh, b.n. singhvi, sanjay singhvi, anil k. gupta, ms. pushpa singhvi, t. sridharan, p.k.
malhotra, s.r. bhat, brig bhushan, r.n. keshwani, and ms. c. ramamurthy, and a.k. sanghi, advs.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

with them for the appearing parties.
j u d g m e n t s the following judgments of the court were delivered with civil appeal numbers 15536-37, 15532-15534 of 1996  arising out of slp  c  numbers 7418-19/92 and 12353-55/95  j u d g m e n t k. ramaswamy, j. leave granted.
these appeals by special leave arise form the judgment of the division bench of the bombay high court dated april 28, 1992 made in appeal number 146 of 1990 and batch.
the facts in appeal arising out of s.l.p. 7417/92, are sufficient to decide the questions of law that have arisen in these appeals.
the appellant initially was a statutory authority under international airport authority of india act.
1971  for short, iaai act  and on its repeal by the airports authority of india act, 1994 was amalgamated with national airport authority  for short, the naa  under single nomenclature, namely, iaai.
the iaai is now reconstituted as a company under companies act, 1956.
the appellants engaged, as contract labour the respondent unions members, for sweeping, cleaning dusting and watching of the building owned ad occupied by the appellant.
the contract labour  regulation and abolition  act, 1970  for short, the act  regulates registration of the establishment of principal employer, the contractor engaging and supplying the contract labour in every establishment i which 20 or more workmen are employed o ay day of the preceding 12 months as contract labour.
the appellant had obtained on september 20,1971 a certificate of registration form regional labour commissioner  central  under the act.
the central government, exercising the power under section 10 of the act, on the basis of recommendation and in consultation with the central advisory board constituted under section 10 1  of the act, issued a notification on december 9,1976 prohibiting employment of contract labour on and from december 9,1976 for sweeping, cleaning, dusting and watching of buildings owned or occupied by the establishment in respect of which the appropriate government under the said act is the central government.
however, the said prohibition was not apply to outside cleaning and other maintenance operations of multi- storeyed building where such cleaning or maintenance cannot be carried out expect with specialised experience.
it would appear that regional labour commissioner central  bombay by letter dated january 20,1972 informed the appellant that the state government is the appropriate government under the act.
therefore, by proceedings dated may 22, 1973 the regional labour commissioner  central  had revoked the registration.
by amendment act 46 of 1982, the industrial disputes act, 1947  for short, the id act  was made applicable to the appellant and was brought on statute book specifying the appellant as one of the industries in relation to which the central government is the appropriate government and the appellant has been carrying on its business by or under its authority with effect form august 21,1982.
the act was amended bringing within its ambit the central government as appropriate government by amendment act 14 of 1986 with effect from january 28,1986.
since the appellant did not abolish the contract system and failed to enforce the notification of the government of india dated december 9,1976, the respondents came to file writ petitions for direction to the appellant to enforce forthwith the aforesaid notification abolishing the contract labour system in the aforesaid services and to direct the appellant to absorb all the employees doing cleaning, sweeping, dusting, washing and watching of the building owned or occupied by the appellant-establishment, with effect from the respective dates of their joining as contract labour in the appellants establishment with all consequential rights benefits, monetary or otherwise, the writ petition was allowed by the leaned single judge on november 16,1989 directing that all contract workers be regularised as employees of the appellant from the date of filing of the writ petition.
preceding thereto, on november 15, 1989, the government of india referred to the central advisory board known as while committee under section 10 1 , which recommended to the central government not to abolish the contract labour system in the aforesaid services.
under the impugned judgment dated april 3,1992, the learned judges of the division bench dismissed the appeal.
similar was the fate of other appeals.
thus these appeals by special leave.
shri ashok desai, the learned attorney general, shri andhyarujina, the learned solicitor general, appearing for union of india and the appellant respectively, contended that the term appropriate government under section 2  1  a  of the act, as on december 9, 1976, was the state government.
the appellant was not carrying on the business as an agent of the central government nor the central government was its principal.
this court, in heavy engineering majdoor union v. the state of bihar ors.   1969  3 scr 995  for short, the heavy engineering case, had interpreted the phrase the appropriate government and held that the central government was not the appropriate government under the id act.
the ratio therein was followed in hindustan aeronautics limited v. the workmen ors.   1975  4 scc 679 and rashtriya mill mazdoor sangh v. model mills nagpur anr.
1984 supp.
scc 443 and food corp. of india workers union v. food corp. of india ors.
1985  2 scc 294, it is thus firmly settled law that the appropriate government until the act was amended with effect from january 28,1986.
therefore, the view of the high court that the appropriate government is the central government is not correct in law.
the learned attorney general further argued that the interpretation of this court in heavy engineering case has stood the test of time and the parties have settled the transaction its basis.
it would, therefore, not be correct to upset that interpretation.
the learned solicitor general contended that the notification published by the central government under section 10 of the act on december 9, 1976 was without jurisdiction.
the advisory board independently should consider whether the contract labour in each of the aforestated services should be abolished taking into consideration the perennial nature of the work, the requirement of number of employees in the respective specified services in the establishment of the appellant.
the advisory board had not adverted to the prescribed criteria of section 10  2  of the appellants establishment.
mohile committee after detailed examination, had recommended to the central government not to abolish the contract labour system in the aforesaid services.
it was contended that the notification dated december 9, 1976 is without authority of law or, at any rate, is clearly illegal and so the direction by the high court to enforce the offending notification is not correct in law.
it was come into force from january 28, 1986, the central government being the appropriate government, had accepted the recommendation of mohile committee of not abolishing the contract labour system.
the notification dated december 9, 1976 no longer remained valid for enforcement.
the high court, therefore was not right in directing the appellant to enforce the notification.
alternatively, it was contended that even assuming that the notification is valid and enforceable, it would be effective only from january, 1986.
however, by abolition of contract labour system, the workmen would not automatically became the employees of the appellant.
in dena nath and ors.  1992  1 scc 695, this court had held that the high court, in exercise of its power under article 226, has o power to direct absorption of the contract labour as its direct employees.
the impugned judgment was expressly disapproved in dena naths case.
therefore, its legality has been knocked off its bottom.
it was further contended that the act, on abolition of the contract labour system, does not envisage to c r ea t e direct relationship between the principal employer and the contract labour.
the erstwhile contract labour have to seek and obtain industrial award under the id act by virtue of which the appellant would be entitled to satisfy the industrial court that there was no need to absorb all the contract labour but only smaller number is required as regular employees.
on recording finding in that behalf, the industrial court would make his award which would be enforceable by the workmen.
this court in gujarat electricity board v. hind mazdoor sabha ors.   1995  5 scc 27 had pointed out the lacuna in the act and given directions of the manner in which the industrial action has to be take on abolition of the contract labour system.
the high court, therefore, was not right in its direction that the workmen require to be absorbed in the respective service of the establishment of the appellant.
it is also contented that the appellant, though initially was a statutory corporation under the iaai act, on its abolition and constitution as a company, is entitled to regulate its own affairs on business principal and the direction for absorption would lead to further losses in which it is being run.
the learned solicitor general has, therefore, submitted a scheme under which its subsidiary, namely, air cargo corporation would take the workmen ad absorb them into service, subject to the above regulation.
it has to consider as to how many of the contract labour require to be absorbed.
prescription of qualification for appointment was necessary the principle of reservation adopted by the central government requires to be followed their names require to be called from employment exchange.
the workmen should be absorbed o the principle of last come first go subject to their fitness, qualifications and probation etc.
shri k.k. singhvi and mrs. indira jai singh, learned senior counsel and a.k.
gupta, learned counsel for the respondents, contended that the appellant is an industry carrying on its business of air transport services.
prior to the iaai act, it was under the control of civil aviation department, government of india after the iaai act, the appellant has been carrying on its industry by or under the authority of the central government.
the relevant provisions in the iaai act would establish the deep and pervasive control the central government has over the functions of the appellant.
whether the appellant is an industry carrying on business by, or under the authority of the central government, must be determined keeping in view the language of the statute that gave birth to the corporation, and the nature of functions under the iaai act and the control the central government is exercising over the working of the industry of the appellant to indicate that right form its inception the appellant has been carrying on its business, by or under the authority of the central government.
rightly understanding that legal position, the central government had referred the matter to the central advisory board under section 10 1  of the act and on the basis of its report had issued the notification dated december 9,1976 abolishing the contract labour system in the aforestated services.
therefore, it is valid in law.
the bench in heavy engineering case narrowly construed the meaning of the phrase the appropriate government placing reliance on the common law doctrine of principle and agent.
the public law interpretation is the appropriate principle of construction of the phrase the appropriate government.
in view of internal evidence provided in the iaai act ad the nature of the business carried on by the appellant by or under the control of the central government, the appropriate government is none other than the central government.
in particular, after the development of law of other authority or instrumentality of the state under article 12 of the constitution, the ratio in heavy engineering case is no longer good law.
in hindustan aeronautics limited and food corp of india cases, this court had not independently, laid any legal preposition.
food corporation of india case was considered with reference to the regional warehouses of the fci situated in different states and in this functional perspective, this court came to the conclusion that the appropriate government would be the state government.
this court in sukhdev singh ors.
v. bhagatram sardar singh anr.   1975  3 scr 619 r.d. shetty v. airport authority ors.   1979  3 scr 1014 managing director, u.p. warehousing corporation anr.
v. v.n. vajapayee  1980  2 scr 733 ajay hasia etc. v. khalid mujib sehravardi ors.
etc.  1981  2 scr 79 - wealth of authorities - had held that settled legal position would lend aid to interpret the phrase appropriate government in public law interpretation under the act the central government is the appropriate government to take a decision under section 10 of the act to abolish the contract labour system.
it is further contended that the central government, after notifying abolition of contract labour system is devoid of power under section 10 1  to appoint another advisory board to consider whether or not to abolish the same contract labour system in the aforesaid services in the establishments of the appellant.
the recommendation of the mohile committee and the resultant second notification were, therefore, without authority of law.
the two judge benches in dena nath and gujarat electricity boards cases have not correctly interpreted the law.
after abolition of the contract labour system, if the principle employer omits to abide by the law and fails to absorb the labour worked in the establishments of the appellant on regular basis, the workmen have no option but to seek judicial redress under article 226 of the constitution.
judicial review being the basis feature of the constitution, the high court is to have the notification enforced.
the citizen has a fundamental right to seek redressal of their legal injury by judicial process to enforce his rights in the proceedings under article 226.
the high court, therefore, was right to dwell into the question and to give the impugned direction in the judgment.
the workmen have a fundamental right to life.
meaningful right to life springs from continued work to earn their livelihood.
the right to employment, therefore, is an integral facet of right to life.
when they were engaged as contract labour and were continuously working in the establishments of the appellant, to make their right to social and economic justice meaningful and effective, they are required to be continuously engaged as contract labour so long as the work is available in the establishment.
when work is of perennial nature and on abolition of contract labour system, they are entitled, per force, to be absorbed labour system, they are entitled, per force, to be absorbed on regular basis transposing their erstwhile contractual status into that of an employer - employee relationship so as to continue to eke out their livelihood by working under the employer and be entitled to receive salary prescribed to that post.
thereby, they became entitled to be absorbed without ay hiatus with effect from the date of abolition.
if any action is needed to be taken thereafter against the employee, it should be only in accordance with either the statutory rules or the id act, if applicable.
in either event, the right to absorption assures to the workmen the right to livelihood as economic empowerment, right to social justice and right to dignity of person which are the concomitants of social democracy.
these facets of constitutional rights guaranteed to the workmen as their fundamental rights should be kept in view in interpreting the expression appropriate government enjoined under section 10 1  of the act and other regulatory provisions in relation to the employment of the workmen.
therefore, the view in dena naths case is not correct is law and requires to be overruled.
there is no hiatus in the operation of the act on abolition of the contract labour system under section 10.
the object and purpose of the act are twofold.
as long as the work in an industry is not perennial, the act regulates the conditions of the workmen employed through the contractor registered under the act.
the services of the workmen are channelised through the contractor.
the principle employer is required to submit the number of workmen needed for employment in its establishment who are supplied by the contractor, an intermediary but the primary responsibility lies upon the principle employer to abide by law the violation thereof visits with penal consequences.
the act regulates systematic operation.
wages to the contract labour should be paid under the direct supervision of the principle employer.
the principle employer is enjoined to compel the contractor to pay over the wages and on his failure, the principle employer should pay and recover it from the contractor intermediary.
the principle employer alone is required to provide safety, health and other amenities to ensure health and safe working conditions in the establishment of the principle employer.
this would clearly indicate the pervasive control the principle employer has over the contract labour employed through intermediary and regulation of the work by the workmen during the period of service.
on advice by the board that the work is of perennial nature etc, and on being satisfied of the conditions specified under section 10 2 , the appropriate government takes a decision to abolish the contract labour and have the decision published by a notification.
it results in abolition of the contract labour.
consequently, the linkage of intermediary contractor is removed from the operational structure under the act.
it creates direct connection between the principle employer and the workmen.
there is no escape route for the principle employer to avoid workmen because it needs their services and the workmen are not meant to be kept in the lurch.
the words principal employer do indicate that the intermediary contractor is merely a supplier of labour to the principal employer.
on effacement of the contractor by abolition of the contract labour system, a direct relationship between the principal employer and the workmen stands knitted.
thereby the workman becomes an employee of the principal employer and it relates back to the date of engagement as a contract labour.
the details of the workmen, the requirement of the work force, duration of the work etc, are regulated under the act and the rules.
the act, the rules and statutory forms do furnish internal and unimpeachable evidence obviating the need to have industrial adjudication much less there arises any dispute.
there is no machinery for workmen under the id act to seek any industrial adjudication.
if any industrial adjudication is to be sought, it would be only by a recognised union in the establishment of the appellants who are unlikely to espouse their dispute.
therefore, the methodology suggested in gujarat electricity boards case, by another bench of two judges, apart from being unworkable and incongruous, is not correct in law.
on abolition of the contract labour, the principle employer is left with no right but duty to enforce the notification, absorb the workmen working in the establishment on contract basis transposing them as its regular employee with all consequential rights and duties attached to a post on which the workmen working directly under the appellant was entitled or liable.
the act gave no option to pick and choose the employees at the whim of the principal employer.
the view of the high court, therefore, is correct to the extent that the notification should be enforced with effect from date of abolition, namely, december 9,1976.
the subsequent amendment with effect from january 28,1986 is only a recognition of ad superimposition of preexisting legal responsibility of the central government as the appropriate government.
it does not come into being only from the date the amendment came into force.
consequently, the workmen, namely, the members of the respondent-union must be declared to be the employees with effect from the respective dates on which they were discharging their duties in the respective services of the appellants establishment either as sweeper, duster, cleaner, watchman etc.
the view, therefore, of the high court to the extent that they should be absorbed with effect from the date of the judgment of the learned single judge, is not correct in law.
therefore, to do complete justice, direction may be given to absorb the workmen with effect from the date abolition, i.e. december 9, 1976 under article 142 of the constitution.
the respective contentions would give rise to the following questions 1.
what is the meaning of the word appropriate government under section 2 1   a  of the act, 2. whether the view taken in heavy engineering case is correct in law?
3. whether on abolition the contract labour are entitled to be absorbed if so, from what date ?
4. whether the high court under article 226 has power to direct their absorption if so, from what date ?
5. whether it is necessary to make a reference under section 10 of the id act for adjudication of dispute qua absorption of the contract labour?
6. whether the view taken by this court in dena nath and gujarat state electricity boards case is correct in law ?
7. whether the workmen have got a right for absorption and, if so, what is the remedy for enforcement ?
section 2  1   a  of the act defines appropriate government to mean-  1  in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate government under the industrial disputes act, 1947  act 14 of 1947 , is the central government, the central government  2  in relation to any other establishment, the government of the state in which that other establishment is situated.
prior to the amendment act 14 of 1986, the definition was as under 2  1   a  appropriate government means-   1  in relation to -  i  any establishment pertaining to any industry carried on by or under the authority of the central government, or pertaining to any such controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the central government, or  ii  any establishment of any railway, cantonment board, major port, mine or oil-field, or  iii  any establishment of a banking or insurance company, the central government,  2  in relation to any other establishment the government of the state in which that other establishment is situate.
section 2 a  i  of the id act defines appropriate government thus unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, appropriate government means, in relation to any industrial disputes concerning any industry carried on by or under the authority of the central government or by a railway company for concerning any such controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the central government and india airlines and air india corporation established under section 3 of the air corporation act 1953 are enumerated industries under amendment act 46 of 1982 which came into force with effect from 21.8.1984.
in heavy engineering case  supra , industrial dispute was referred under section 10 of the id act by the state government of bihar to the industrial tribunal for its adjudication.
the competency of the state government was questioned by the mazdoor union contending that the appropriate government to refer the dispute was the central government.
the high court negatived the contention and had upheld the validity of reference, on appeal, a bench of two judges had held that the words under authority of means pursuant to the authority, such as an agent or a servants acts under or pursuant to the authority of its principal or master.
the heavy engineering company cannot be said to be carrying on its business pursuant to the authority of the central government.
placing reliance on common law interpretation, the bench was of the opinion that the company derived its powers and functions from its memorandum ad articles of association.
though the entire share capital was contributed by the central government and all the shares were held by the president and officers of the central government were in-charge of the management, it did not make any difference.
the company and the share holders are distinct entities.
the fact that the president of india and certain officers hold all its shares did not make the company an agent either of the president or of the central government.
the power to decide how the company should function the power to appoint directors and the power to determine the wages all salaries payable by the company to its employees, were all derived form the memorandum of company and articles of association of the company and not by the reason of the company being the agent of the central government.
the learned judges came to that conclusion on the basic of concessions and on private law of principal and agent and as regards a company registered under the companies act, on the basic of the power of internal management.
in hindustan aeronautics limited case  supra , learned judges merely followed the ratio of heavy engineering case.
it further concluded that the enumeration of certain statutory corporations in the definition would indicate that those enumerated corporations would come within the definition of the appropriate government without any further discussion.
in rashtriya mill mazdoor sanghs case, a bench of three judges, while interpreting section 32  iv  of the payment of bonus act, considered the purpose of the expression under the authority of any department of the central government for purpose of payment of bonus.
the meaning and scope of the expression industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of the central government, was examined and it was held that the industrial undertaking retains its identity, personality and status unchanged though in its management, the central government exercised the power to give a direction under section 16 and the management is subjected to regulatory control.
it is seen that the above decision was reached in the context in which the payment of bonus was to be determined and paid to the employees by the department.
in food corporation of indias case  supra , a bench of two judges was to consider whether regional office of the food corporation of india and the warehouses etc. were an establishment within the meaning of section 2 i  e  of the act and whether fci is an industry carried on by or under the authority of the central government.
following the aforesaid three decisions, it was held that a bare reading of the definition under the act means inter alia any place, any industry, trade, business, manufacture, warehouse, godown or the place set up by the corporation where its business is carried on.
though for the purpose of industrial disputes the central government is an appropriate government in relation to food corporation of india, its establishment at various places is not under the control of the government of india.
therefore, appropriate government under the industrial disputes act is the state government.
in that behalf, the learned judges, undoubtedly, relied upon heavy engineering case.
it would thus be seen that the construction adopted on the phrase appropriate government under the id act was considered with reference to its functional efficacy.
the heavy engineering case, as held earlier, had proceeded on common law principles and the concession by the counsel.
as noted, the appellant, to start with, was a statutory authority but pending appeal in this court, due to change in law and in order to be in tune with open economy, it became a company registered under the companies act.
to consider its sweep on the effect of heavy engineering case on the interpretation of the phrase appropriate government, it would be necessary to recapitulate the preamble, fundamental rights  part iii  and directive principle  part iv  - trinity setting out the conscience of the constitution deriving from the source we, the people, a charter to establish an egalitarian social order in which social and economic justice with dignity of person and equality of status and opportunity, are assured to every citizen in a socialist democratic bharat republic.
the constitution, the supreme law heralds to achieve the above goals under the rule of law.
life of law is not logic but is one of experience, constitution provides an enduring instrument, designed to meet the changing needs of each succeeding generation altering and adjusting the unequal conditions to pave way for social and economic democracy within the spirit drawn from the constitution.
so too, the legal redressal within the said parameters.
the words in the constitution or in an act are but a framework of the concept which may change more than words themselves consistent with the march of law.
constitutional issues require interpretation broadly not by play of words or without the acceptance of the line of their growth, preamble of the constitution, as its integral part, is people including workmen, harmoniously blending the details enumerated in the fundamental rights and the directive principles.
the act is a social welfare measure to further the general interest of the community of workmen as opposed to the particular interest of the individual enterpreneur.
it seeks to achieve a public purpose, i.e., regulated conditions of contract labour and to abolish it when it is found to be of perennial nature etc.
the individual interest can, therefore, no longer stem the forward flowing tide and must, of necessity, give way to the broader public purpose of establishing social and economic democracy in which every workmen realises socio- economic justice assured in the preamble, articles 14,15 and 21 and the directive principles of the constitution.
the founding fathers of the constitution, cognizant of the reality of life wisely engrafted the fundamental rights and directive principles in chapters iii and iv for a democratic way of life to every one in bharat republic, the state under article 38 is enjoined strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may, a social order in which justice, social, economic and political shall inform all the institutions of the national life and to minimise the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate the inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations, article 39 a  provides that the state shall direct its policies towards securing the citizens, men and women equally, the right to an adequate means of livelihood clause   d  provides for equal pay for equal work for both men and women clause  e  provides to secure the health and strength of workers.
articles 41 provides that within the limits of its economic capacity and development, the state shall make effective provision to secure the right to work as fundamental with just and human conditions of work by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way in which the worker shall be assured of living wages, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities to the workmen.
the poor, the workman and common man can secure and realise economic and social freedom only through the right to work and right to adequate means of livelihood, to just and human conditions of work, to a living wage, a decent standard of life.
education and leisure.
to them, these are fundamental facets of life.
article 43a, brought by 42nd constitution  amendment  act, 1976 enjoins upon the state to secure by suitable legislation or in any other way, the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry.
article 46 gives a positive mandate to promote economic and educational interest of the weaker sections of the people.
correspondingly, article 51a imposes fundamental duties on every citizen to develop the scientific temper, humanism and to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.
to make these rights meaningful to workmen and meaningful right to life a reality to workmen, shift of judicial orientation from private law principles to public law interpretation harmoniously fusing the interest of the community.
article 39a furnishes beacon light that justice be done o