--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner l. janakirama iyer and others vs. respondent p. m. nilakanta iyer and others date of judgment 26/10/1961 bench gajendragadkar, p.b. bench gajendragadkar, p.b. sinha, bhuvneshwar p. cj  dayal, raghubar citation 1962 air 633 1962 scr supl.  
1  206 citator info r 1965 sc1153  50,30,48  r 1967 sc1440  11  rf 1977 sc1680  7  r 1980 sc 17  27,29,30  act trust-debtors conveying property to three trustee for repayment of debts-administration suit by debtors dismissed on withdrawal subsequent suit on behalf of general body of creditors if barred by res judicata limitation claim for possession- mainteinability sale deed executed by two of the three trustees validity amendment of decree by high court after admission of appeal by supreme court-award of net profit to trust estate and internal to alienation in favour of person intermeddling with trust estate trustee de son tort indian trusts act 1882 2 of 1882  ss 48,63- code of civil procedure, 1908  act v of 1908  ss.
11, 151 and 152 indian limitation act, 1908  ix of 1908  arts 134, 120.
headnote these appeals arose out of a representative suit filed on behalf of the creditors of defendants i to 6 who hat executed a trust deed on august 26, 1936, conveying their properties to three trustees with authority to dispose of the one and distribute the ale proceeds ratably amongst the creditors.
the trust deed required the three trustees to act according to the decision arrived at either unanimously or by majority.
the trustees accepted the trust and conveyed all the properties except the family house in administration of the trust.
two of the sale deeds in favour of two of the creditors, defendants 13 and 14, a mortgagee creditor, in the suit were executed by only two or the trustees .
in a suit brought by the said defendants 1 to 6 for administration of trust the trial court passed a preliminary decree.
the high court on appeal remanded the matter to the trial court for a finding as to the market value of the lands sold.
the trial court submitted its finding.
at this stage defendants 1 to 6 withdrew the suit which we dismissed.
the present suit under o. i, r. 8 of the code of civil procedure we filed on october 29, 1947, before such withdrawal.
the claimed made therein, inter alia, were for a declaration that the properties in question were still impressed with the trust, for the removal the surviving trustee and appointment of an a administrator to realise the amount, recover position of the properties and re-sell them.
the trial judge passed a decree infavour of the plaintiffs .
the high court in substance confirmed that decree but modified it by awarding simple interest 207 instead of compound interest decreed in favour of defendant 14.
the two sale deeds, executed by only two of the trustees, were declared invalid and it was found that the third trustee did not give his consent to it.
the sale deed in favour of defendant 12 was declared invalid on the ground that he had intermeddled with the trust estate and had thus become a trustee de sou tort.
the courts below also rejected the pleas of limitation and res judicata raised on behalf of the defendants.
some of the creditor detendants appealed.
after the appeals had been admitted by this court the high court amended the decretal order by substituting the words mesne profits by net profits under ss. 151 and 152 of the code of civil procedure.
held, that the question whether art.
120 or art.
134 of indian limitation act applied to a case had to be decided on the case made in the plaint, read as whole and properly construed.
since the present suit was not one for a mere declaration but for possession of property, having been valued and framed as such, deliverable to the administrator, it was governed by art.
134 and not by art.
120 of the act and was thus within time.
it was not correct to say that s. 63 of the indian trust act was exhaustive as to the remedies available to a beneficiary under a private trust or that claim for constructive possession, such as was made in the present suit, was prohibited under that section.
rani chhatra kumari devi v. prince mohan bikram shah,  1931  i. l. r. 10 pat.
851, distinguished.
subbaiya pandaram v. mohammad mustapha merachayar ,  1923  l. r.
50 ie a. 295, a subramania iyer v. p. nagarathna
naicker ,  1910 20 mad.
l. j. 151 and masjid shahid ganj v. shiromani gurdwara prabandhak committee amritsar  1940  l. r. 67 i. a. 251, referred to.
nor could the suit be said to be barred by res judicata since it did not fall within the scope of s. ii of the code of civil procedure.
the suit being one under o. 1, r. 8 of the code, it could not be said that defendants i to 6, plaintiff in the earlier suit, and the creditors, plaintiffs in the present suit, where the same party or parties claiming through each other.
clause 23 of the trust deed, properly construed, conformed to the provision of s. 48 of the trusts act that where there are more trustees than one, they must all join in t

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

he execution of the trust, and did not provide for an exception to that rule, even though it provided that decisions by the trustees need not a ways be unanimous but could be by majority as well.
such sale deeds as had been executed by 208 two of the trustees only must therefore fail.
the alternative.
case of consent given by the third trustee to the transaction could be of no avail since it could not be substantiated by evidence lala man mohan das v. janaki man prasad,  1944  l. r. 72 i. a. 39, referred to.
the high court had jurisdiction under ss. 151 and 152 of the code of civil procedure to correct the obvious error in the decretal order even though the appeals from the said decree had already been admitted by this court.
nor could the amendment be challenged on merits.
although a successful plaintiff would not normally be entitled to mesne profits for more than three years in view of art.
109 of the limitation act, the court had jurisdiction in the case of a trust to make appropriate direction in the decree, while awarding net profiles to the trust and interest to the mortgagee, in adjustment of the equities between them.
salgur prasad v har narain das  1932  l.r. 59 i. a. 147, bhagwat dayal singh v. debi dayal sahu,  1908   l. r. 35 i. a. 48 and jagannath prasad singh chowdhury v. surajmal jalal ,  1926  l. r. 54 i. a. 1, referred to.
even slight intermeddling with the trust estate is sufficient to make a person trustee de son tort.
since in the instant case, the acts of intermeddling by one of the defendant covered a fairly long period, the courts below were right in holding that the sale in his favour must be set aside as one in favour, of a trustee de son tort.
judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeals numbers 62 and 77 of 1959.
appeals from the judgment and decree dated march 25, 1953, of the madras high court in a. s. numbers 731 and 720 of 1950.
m. c. setalvad, attorney general for india and also for legal representatives of appellant number 1 in c. a. number 62 of 1959.
a. v. viswanatha sastri, m. k. ramamurthi and s. t. venkataraman, for respondents numbers 2 and 10  in c. a. number 62 of 69  and respondents numbers 2 and r. ganapathy iyer and g. gopalakrishnan for appellant number 2 and also for legal representative of appellant number 1  in c. a. number 77 of 1961  c. r. pattabhi raman and g. gopalakrishnan, for appellant number 3 in  c. a. number 77/59 .
1961.
october 26.
the judgment of the court was delivered by gajendragadkar, j.-these two appeals have been brought to this court by two sets of defendants with a certificate of the madras high court and they arise out of a suit instituted under o. 1, r. 8 on behalf of the general body of creditors for administration against the trustees and alienees of the properties which belonged to their debtors.
defendant 14 and his sons defendants 18 to 24 are the appellants in civil appeal number 62 of 1959 while defendants 12, 13 and 16 are the appellants in civil appeal number 77 of 1959.
defendants 1 to 6 are the debtors.
they were members of an undivided hindu family known as kalakkad pannayar family in tirunelveli district.
the family was doing commission agency business in petrol, kerosene and crude oil.
it had secured agency rights from the burmah-shell company.
the members of the family became heavily indebted by about june, 1936, and as a result there was a pressure from their creditors.
in order to meet the said pressure a deed of composition was executed  ex. b. 2  on july 8, 1936.
as a result of this composition 56 out of the creditors of the family agreed to a scheme for settlement of their debts.
under this deed defendant 7 was constituted as a trustee and as such was empowered to take over the assets of the debtors, sell them to the best advantage and distribute the proceeds rateably amongst all credit. .
it appears that before the scheme under the competition could be successfully or effectively worked out one of the creditors, ayyah ayyar, filed an insolvency petition, number 26 of 1936, in the sub-court at tirunelveli on july 30, 1936.
by this petition the creditor wanted defendants 1 to 6 to be r adjudged insolvent.
during the pendency of these a proceedings, on august 26, 1936 defendants 1 to ff executed a deed of trust,  ex.b.7  by this document they conveyed all their movable and immovable properties including  j the outstanding due to them to three trustees.
these were defendant 7 subbarayalu reddiar, veerabahu pillai and narayana pillai.
tho trustees were authorised to dispose of the assets of  defendants 1 to 6 and distribute the proceeds rateably amongst the creditors.
narayana pillai died in february, 1938.
veerabahu pillai died some time before the present suit was instituted.
defendants 9 and 10 are the undivided sons of defendants 7, whereas defendant 11 is the widow and defendants 12 and 13 are the step-brothers of veerabahu pillai.
the trustees accerted the trust and entered upon their duties.
they took possession of the immovable properties covered by the trust.
they paid off the secured creditors, and in regard to unsecured creditors they arranged to pay 50 of their dues by selling the immovable properties either to the creditors themselves or to third parties directing them to discharge the secured debts, and the unsecured debts to the extent of 50 of their value.
it is common ground that except their family house in which defendants 1 to 6 resided all other immovable properties belonging to them were conveyed under the trust deed.
defendant 14 was a secured creditor in whose favour a mortgage of the first schedule properties had been excelled for a sum of rs. 30,000 on june 3, 1935   ex. b- 95 .
this mortgage carried 10, compound interest.
it appears that he had also lent a sum of rs. 3,000 on a promissory note on july 17, 1935 ex. b- 95 a .
this note carried interest at 12.
the promissory note was supported by the pledge of the mortgage deed.
in order to pay off the debts thus due to defendant 14 the trustees conveyed to him schedule i mortgaged properties for rs. 42,000 on may 22, 1937   ex. b 94  out of the said consideration the amount due under the mortgage as well as the amount due under the promissory note were satisfied leaving a balance of rs. 3,030 in the hands of the purchaser.
he was directed to utilise this balance for repaying 50 of the dues of purchaser and 3 who have brought the present suit.
the sale deed in favour of defendant 14 was executed by only two out of the three trustees,, defendant i and veerabahu pillai.
defendants 18 to 24 are the son of defendant 14.
as we have already seen defendant 14 and his sons are the appellants in  civil appeal number 62 of 1959.
defendant 7 who was one of the trustees, was a creditor of the trustees to the extent of rs. 6,000.
his daughter-in-law was a creditor to the extent of rs. 2,000-.
in satisfaction of 50 of the debt due to these two persons the trustees conveyed schedule iii properties to defendants 8, 9 and 10 who are the undivided sons of defendant 7  ex. b. 8 .
this document executed on december 16, 1936, for rs. 4,000.
the purchasers in their turn sold the properties to defendant 7 on may 30, 1947.
defendant 12 is the step-brother of the trustee veerabahu pillai and he purchased schedule v properties on november 7, 1941, for rs. 2,000  ex. b-90 .
defendant 13 who is the brother of defendant 12 purchased schedule ii properties for rs. 15,000 on august 29, 1937,  ex. b. 37 .
b. 37 .
this document was executed only by two out of the three trustees.
another sale deed was passed in favour of defendant 13 in respect of schedule properties  ex.
b. 79  on february , 1942, for rs. 2,000.
defendant 16 who is the son-in-law of defendant 13 purchased two sets of properties schedule vii and schedule vii-a on may 7, 1943, and june 4, 1943,   exs. b-104 and b-105  for rs. 8,000 and rs.
600 respectively the properties thus conveyed to the respective purchasers were put into their possession.
it is with the sale deeds executed in favour of defendant 14 and those executed in favour of defendant 12, 13 and 16 that we are concerned in a the present appeals.
defendants 12, 13 and 16 are the appellants in civil appeal number 77 of 1959.
in 1943 defendants 1 to 6 brought a suit, o. s. .
number 30 of 1943 in the sub court at tirunelveli for the administration of the trust created by them, for account from the trustees and for recovery of the trust properties.
to this suit they impleaded the surviving trustees and the alienees as defendants.
in this suit a preliminary decree for account was passed by this sub court.
their claim, however, for the recovery of immovable properties was not granted.
this decree gave rise to three appeals before the madras high court, one by defendants 1 to 6 and the others by the trustees and the alienees respectively.
these appeals were appeals a. s. number 473, 510 and 544 of 1944.
the three appeals were heard together and on december 20, 1944, a common judgment was delivered.
the high court confirmed the ending of the trial court that the trustee were liable to render account for the management of the trust, and it remanded the suit for a finding as to the market value of the lands covered by the respective sale deeds which had been challenged by defendants 1 to 6 the high court thought that in determining the validity of the claim made by defendants 1 to 6 it was necessary to find out the proper value of the properties at the relevant time for that alone would enable the court to decide whether the alienations had been effected by the trustees for grossly inadequate price as alleged by defendants 1 to 6.
in the course of its judgment the high court observed that it was not open to the authors of the trust to challenge the validity of the transaction which was permitted by them by the instrument of trust, for it was clear that under the said trust deed the trustee were empowered to convey properties to the creditors in the discharge of their duties.
after remand the subordinate judge took evidence, made his findings and submitted them to the high court.
it was at that stage that defendants 1 to 6 filed a petition for withdrawal of the litigation.
this petition was allowed on december 12, 1947, with the result that the suit filed by defendants 1 to 6 o.s. number 30 of 1943, was dismissed with costs throughout.
whilst the proceedings in the said three appeals were pending in the high court and before defendants 1 to 6 were allowed to withdraw the litigation the present suit was filed on october 29, 1947, by the three plaintiff who are the creditors of defendants 1 to 6 and who purported to act on behalf of the general body of creditors.
leave was granted to the plaintiff under o. 1, r. 8 and the suit has, therefore, been conducted as a representative suit.
in the suit the plaintiffs ask for an account from defendant 7 and defendants 11 to 13 who are the legal representatives of veerabahu pillai on the allegation that the trustee have been guilty of wilful default.
they also claim a declaration that the properties described in schedules i to vii-a and viii are still impressed with the trust and they ask for an order for the administration of the trust by removing defendant 7 and appointing an administrator to realise the amount due from the trustees on such account and to recover possession of the properties mentioned in the said schedule, re-call them and distribute the sale proceeds rateably amongst the unsecured creditors.
several defences were raised to this suit by the several defendants.
it was denied that the trustees were negligent in the matter of collecting the outstandings and that the alienations effected by them were for inadequate considerations and otherwise improper and unjustified.
it was urged that the present suit was barred by res judicata as a result of the withdrawal of 0.
s. number 30 of 1943.
it was further alleged that the suit was not maintainable, that it was bad for non-joinder of parties and was barred time.
the respective by alienees pleaded that the transfers in their favour were valid and binding.
defendant 7 defendant specifically urged that he was not guilty of any breach of trust j and a plea was also raised that the creditors who .
had filed the present suit had acquiesced in some of the dealings .
defendant 12 resisted the plaintiffs case that he had intermeddled in the management of the trust estate and was therefore liable as a trustee de son tort.
an objection was raised about the proper valuation of the suit and it was urged that the proper court fee had not been paid.
it was denied that sale deeds executed by only two out of the three trustees were invalid.
on these pleadings twenty nine issues were framed by the learned trial judge.
in substance the trial judge rejected the plaintiffs claim for account, but he passed a decree declaring that the properties described ill schedules i to iii, v, vii, i to and viii continued to be impressed with the trust imposed upon them by the trustees.
the decree directed the removal of defendant 7 and the appointment of the advocates instead as administration.
it further directed defendants is, 13,14, 16 and 17 to deliver possession of the properties in their respective possession and asked the administrators to re-sell the said properties and distribute the proceeds amongst the creditors and to pay the surplus, if any, to defendants 1 to 6.
under the decree defendants 12, 13, 14 and 16 were held entitled to receive the respective consideration of the sales and mortgages together with interest and they were also liable to render account for profits of the properties in their possession.
this decree gave rise to three appeals before the high court.
appeal a. s. number 720 of 1949 was filed by defendant 14 and his sons defendants 18 to 24.
appeal a. .
number 731 of 1949 was filed by defendants 12, 13 and 16 and appeal a. s. number 21 of 1950 by defendants 8, 9, 10 and 17.
ill substance the high court has confirmed the decree passed by the trial court and dismissed all the three appeals.
the high court has, however, modified the trial courts decree in regard to the interest which the decree had ordered to be paid to the alienees.
the high court took the view that in adjusting equities between the alienees, the alienations in whose favour were found to be invalid, and the trust, the contract rate of interest need not be awarded.
subject to the modifications made in regard to the payment of interest the rest of the decree has been confirmed.
defendants x, 9 and 10 and the legal representative of defendant 17 who died pending the proceedings before the high court have not challenged the decree passed by the high court in their appeal a. s. number 21 of 1950.
defendants 14 and 18 to 24 as well as defendants 12,13 and 16 have, however, challenged the decision of the high court and have obtained a certificate from the said high court in that behalf it would thus be seen that in the two appeals before this court we are concerned with six transactional.
b - 94 which is executed in favour of defendant 14, ex. 13-90 which is executed in defendant 12, exs.
b. 37 and b. 79 which are executed in favour of defendant 13 and exs. b-104 and r-105 which are executed in favour of defendant 16.
broadly stated both the courts below have found that all these alienations were effected for inadequate consideration.
it has also been found that exs.
b-94 and b-37 are invalid for the reason that they have bee executed by only two out of the three trustees, whereas the transfers under exs.
b-12, b-13 and be 16 held to be invalid as they are transfers in favour of the relations of one of the trustees veerabahu.
it has further been found that defendant 12 intermeddled with the estate of the trust and must therefore be regarded as trustee de son tort and therefore the transfer made to him is invalid as a matter of law.
both the courts have rejected the plea of res judicata and limitation raised by the defendants.
there are some of the points of law which are common to both the appeals and it would be convenient to deal with them in a the order in which they have been raised before .
the first point argued before us by the learned attorney-general on behalf of the appellants in civil appeal number 62 of 1959  defendants 14 and 18 to 24  is one of limitation.
he contends that on a fair and reasonable construction the present suit attracts the application of art.
120 and is therefore barred.
on the other hand, mr. viswanatha sastri, for the plaintiffs, contends that the plaint clearly showed that the plaintiffs are not asking merely for a declaration but they are also claiming that a new administrator should be appointed and a direction should be issued that the property in question should be delivered to him.
such a claim, according to him, obviously attracts art.
131.
it is common-ground that if art.
120 applies the suit is beyond time, whereas if art.
134 is applicable the suit is within time.
the decision of this question would naturally depend upon the construction of the plaint.
is the claim made in the plaint one of declaration, or is it a claim for possession of immovable properties?
the plaint sets out all the material facts which constitute the background to the present litigation, marks material allegations in respect of all the alienation impeached in the plaint, and by paragraph 35 it prays, inter aha, that schedules i to vii-a and should be adjudged as still impressed as trust imposed on them by the deed of august 26, 1936, and direct their re-sale.
that is cl.
c  of paragraph 35. by cl.
d  it is prayed that the court should order the administration of the trust by removing defendant 7 if need be and appointing an administrator or officer of court  1  to realise the amounts mentioned in cl.   a ,  b  to recover possession.
and re-sell the properties referred to in paragraph  c ,  3  to distribute the proceeds rateably amongst the unsecured creditors and perform such other acts and functions as may be necessary to 6 effectuate the trust in question.
the learned attorney general contends that cl.   c  asks for adjudication or declaration that the properties in question are impressed with the trust and that is no mere than a declaration, and according to him cl.
d  prays for the appointment of an administrator to realise the amounts and to recover possession of the properties and re-sell them.
he suggests that on a fair construction of cl.   d  all that the plaintiff pray for is the removal of defendant 7 and the appointment of an administrator with power to realise the amounts specified and to recover possession of the properties indicated and to re- sell them.
this is not a claim that possession should be delivered to the administrator in the present suit.
it may be conceded that if read by itself alone cl.
d  may be capable of the construction which the learned attorney-general seeks to put on it but in construing the plaint we must have regard to all the relevant allegations made in the plaint and must look at the substance of the matter and not its form.
it is significant that the plaintiffs have valued the suit for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction at rs. 23,745 and this valuation includes several items ill respect of different properties valued under s, 7 5  of the court fees act.
the valuation made in respect of the different items of properties under s.7 5  is obviously and clearly valuation made on the footing that a claim for possession is made.
in fact the plaint specifically avers that the plaintiff valued the suit for possession covered by covered and d-2 under .
7 5  as indicated in the plaint.
thus there can be no doubt that the plaint has been valued on the basic that a claim for possession of the properties covered by the schedules is intended to be made.
besides, it is also significant that in regard to the claim made be the plaintiff in respect of the transfer in favour of defendant 14 his sons defendant 18 to 24 have been joined specifically on the ground that since the plaintiffs claim possession of the said property the said defendants are necessary parties as it is found that they are in possession of the said properties.
in other words, the joinder of defendants 18 to 24 to the present suit is based solely on the ground that a claim for possession is made in the plaint and defendants 18 to 24 being in possession are necessary parties to the suit.
therefore, in our opinion, reading the plaint as a whole it would be unreasonable to construe cl.   d  in paragraph 35 in the manner suggested by the learned attorney- general.
the prayer which the clause really purports to make is that as administrator should be appointed and that an order should be passed against the respective defendants asking them to deliver possession of the properties to the said administrator.
if that we so the plaint cannot be construed as one in which a mere claim for declaration is made.
it is a plaint in which a declaration is no doubt claimed but based on the said declaration or adjudication a further claim for possession to the administrator is also made.
the result, therefore, is that the argument that the prayer made in the plaint attracts art.
120 must be rejected.
the next continuation urged is that the plaintiffs cannot sue for possession but must confine themselves only to a claim for declaration.
it is not disputed by the learned attorney-general that in regard to public charitable trusts the beneficiaries are entitled to sue for setting aside alienations of the trust properties improperly effected by the trustees, and to ask for the restoration of possession of the said trust properties to the trustees newly appointed.
indeed, there is ample judicial authority in support of this position.
in a. subramania iyer v. p nagarathna naicker  1 , it was held by the madras high court that in a suit by the worshippers of a temple to have the alienation of the trust property by some of the defendants, trustees.
to the other defendants declared invalid and for possession to the trustees, the proper decree to be made if the court be of the opinion that the alienation is invalid is to decree possession to those defendants who are trustee.
it was further held that the trustees need not be referred to a separate suit for the purpose.
in masjid shahid ganj v. shiromani, gurdwara parbandhak committee, amritsar  2  the privy council has recognised this right in these words the right of a muslim worshipper may be regarded as an individual right, but what is the nature of the right it is not a sort of easement in gross, but an element in the general right of a beneficiary to have the waqf property recovered by its proper custodians and applied to its proper purpose.
such an individual may, if he sues in time, procure the ejectment of a trespasser and have the property delivered into the possession of the mutawali or of some other person for the purposes of the waqf .
the argument, however, is that in regard to private trustee which are governed by the indian trusts act such a course is not open to the beneficiary because of the provisions of s.63 of the trustee act.
section 63 provides that where trust property comes into the hands of a third person inconsistently with the trust, the beneficiary may require him to admit formally, or may institute a suit for a declaration, that the property is comprised in the trust.
the learned attorney-general contends that the only remedy available to a beneficiary under a private trust is that prescribed by 863 and no other.
he can either require the alienee to admit that the property is comprised in the trust, or if the alienee refuses to make the admission the  1   1910  20 mad.
l, j, 151.   2   1940  l. r. 671.
a. 251, 267, beneficiary may bring a suit for a declaration in that behalf in support of this contention strong reliance has been placed on the decision of the privy council in rani  chhatra kumari devi v. prince mohan bikram shah  1 .
in that case the respondent had claimed title to the properties as owner in various ways and had sued as the proprietor of the properties covered by the action.
all these grounds were rejected and it was held that the respondent could claim no title as a proprietor at all.
even so, while dealing with the question of limitation the privy council made certain observations and it is those observations which are pressed into service by the learned attorney general.
article 144 on which the respondent relied in that case, it has been held, is applicable only to a possessory suit by the owner of the property claimed against a person holding adversely to him without title, and the plea made by the respondent that he was the owner on several grounds was rejected but in the course of its judgment the privy council assumed that by reason of the contract pleaded by the respondent the properties were impressed with the continuing trust in favour of the respondent, and observed that even so their lordships were unable to hold that this would entitle him to sue for possession as owner.
sir george lowndes, who delivered the judgment of the board, referred to the fact that the indian law does not recognise legal and equitable estates.
by that law, there can be but one owner, and where the property is vested in a trustee, the owner must, their lordships think, the trustee, and so the right of a beneficiary is, in proper case, to call upon the trustee to convey to him.
it is in that connection that sir george lowndes further observed that the enforcement of this right would, their lordships think, be barred after six years under art.
120 of the limitation act, and if the beneficiary has allowed this period  1   1931  i.l.r.
10 pat.
851 to expire without suing he cannot afterwards file a possessory suit, until conveyance he is not the owner.
it is clear that such a trust as is relied upon in the present case would not fall within s.10 of the limitation act as it would be impossible to hold that the properties which vested in the appellant under the terms of the wills which have been proved were so vested for the specific purpose of making them over to the respondent.
it would thus be seen that these observations mean no more than this that the beneficiary under a private trust cannot claim to recover possession of the property from the trustee so as to attract the application of art.
144 of the limitation act.
he can make the claim for a declaration which would be governed by art.
120.
it is quite clear that the question as to whether in a proper case the beneficiary can.
not apply for the removal of the trustee, for the appointment of a new trustee, and for the delivery to the new trustee of the property improperly alienated by the previous trustee did not fall to be considered in that case.
all that the privy council was called upon to consider was whether a beneficiary can bring a suit for possession against a trustee and whether such a suit can be governed by art.
144 and in holding that such a suit cannot be brought by the beneficiary the privy council pointed out that art.
144 postulates a suit by the owner and a beneficiary is not an owner under the indian law of trusts.
we are, therefore, satisfied that the observations on which reliance is placed by the learned attorney general cannot be said to amount to a decision that in no case can a beneficiary claim that the trustee appointed under the trust should be removed and new trustee should be appointed and the trust properties improperly alienated by the previous trustee should be ordered to be delivered into the possession of the new trustee.
section 63 no doubt provides for the two remedies which are available to the beneficiary, but in our opinion s. 63 cannot be treated as exhaustive on the subject and so it cannot be urged that a claim for constructive possession like the one made in the present suit is prohibited by 8. 63.
prima facie s. 10 of the limitation act seems to contemplate an action by a beneficiary under a trust to which 8. 10 applies and provides that in such an action the beneficiary may follow the property and ask for a proper order 8 to the delivery of the said property to the dew trustee.
if that be so, the provisions of s. 10 would suggest that the remedies prescribed by 8. 63 are not exhaustive.
besides, it would be relevant to observe that if s. 63 is held to be exhaustive as to the remedies available to beneficiary it would lead to very anomalous results.
if a trustee improperly alienates the trust property the only remedy which would on that view be available to the beneficiary is to obtain a declaration.
how would this declaration be effective to bring back to the trust the property improperly alienated?
strictly and literally construed s. 63 dose not refer to the remedy for the appointment of a new trustee either, so that on a literal construction of s. 63 even that remedy may be outside its purview but assuming that a beneficiary can ask for a declaration that the property alienated is impressed in the trust and also add a prayer for the appointment of a new trustee that only means that after the new trustee is appointed he will have to sue the alienee for possession and very often this suit would be defeated by the alienees plea of adverse possession.
it is hardly necessary to emphasis that when the beneficiary sues for a declaration as required by s. 63 and the alienee resists the said suit the adverse possession of the alienee is emphatically brought out and the pendency of the beneficiarys suit would not affect that position so that on the view that a. 63 is exhaustive more often than not the beneficiarys claim would in substance be defeated by the adverse possession of the alienee.
in subbaiya pandaram v. mahamad mustapha maracayar  1 , this is exactly what happened.
in, the presence of the purchaser it was declared that the trust have been validly created and that the property was in fact a trust property.
their lordships pointed out that at the moment when the said decree was passed the possession of the property was adverse and the declaration that the property had been properly made subject to the trust disposition, and therefore ought not to have been seized, did not disturb or affect the quality of his possession it merely emphasised the fact that it was adverse.
no further step was taken in consequence of that declaration until the present proceedings were instituted when it was too late.
we would like to add that if for bringing back to the trust the properties improperly alienated by the trustees two suits are required to be filed we apprehend that the second suit by the newly appointed trustee for obtaining possession of the properties would almost always be too late, and so s. 63 cannot be read as exhaustively dealing with all the remedies available to the beneficiary.
we must, therefore, reject the argument that the suit for possession in the form in which the prayer has been made by the plaintiffs is incompetent.
that takes us to the question of res judicata.
the argument is that on general grounds of res judicata the dismissal of the suit  o. s. number 30 of 1943  filed by defendants 1 to 6 should preclude the trial of the present suit.
it has been fairly conceded that in terms s. 11 of the code cannot apply because the present suit is filed by the creditors defendants 1 to 6 in their representative character and it conducted as a representative suit under o. 1, r. 8 and it cannot be said that defendants 1 to 6 who were plaintiffs in the earlier suit and the creditors who have brought the present suit are the same parties or parties who claim  1  1923 l.r 50 i.a. 295.
through each other.
where s. 11 is the thus inapplicable it would not be permissible to rely upon the general doctrine of res judicata.
we are dealing with a suit and the only ground on which res judicata can be urged against such a suit can be the provisions of s. 11 and no other.
in our opinion therefore, there is no substance in the ground that the present suit is barred by res judicata.
the next question which falls to be considered is the most important question in these appeals.
we have already seen that three trustees were appointed under the trust deed executed by defendants 1 to 6 and two of the impugned sale deeds have been executed by only two out of the said three trustees.
the courts below have held that two out of the three trustees could not convey a valid title and so on that ground alone the two transfers are invalid.
it is urged before us that this conclusion is not justified on a fair and reasonable construction of cl.
23 of the trust deed.
be.
fore considering this p