--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

judgment bhagwati, j. - these petitions under article 32 of the constitution raise a common question of law whether section 5  7a  of the indian income-tax act, hereinafter called the act, is ultra vires the constitution as infringing the fundamental rights enshrined in article 14 and article 19  1   g .
the facts which led to the filing of the petitions may be shortly stated.
petitions numbers 97 and 97a of 1956 the petitioners and messrs. pannalal binjraj, oil mill owners, merchants and commission agents, carrying on business at sahibganj in the district of santhal parganas, having their branch at 94, lower chitpur road, calcutta, petitioner number 1, and r. b. jamuna das chowdhury, resident of the same place and erstwhile karta of the hindu undivided family, which carried on business in the name and style of messrs. pannalal binjraj, petitioner number 2. before 28th september, 1954, they were being assessed by the income-tax officer, special circle, patna.
on 28th september, 1954, the central board of revenue made an order transferring their cases to the income-tax officer, central circle xi, calcutta.
on 22nd january, 1955, the central board of revenue transferred the cases of petitioner number 2 to the income-tax officer, central circle vi, delhi, and on 12th july, 1955, it similarly transferred the cases of petitioner number 1 to the same officer.
after the dates of such transfer to the income-tax officer, central circle vi, delhi, said officer instituted several proceedings against them and the petitioners challenged in these petitions the validity of the said orders of transfer and all the subsequent proceedings including the assessment orders as well as the order levying penalty for non-payment of the income-tax which had been already assessed prior thereto, on the ground that section 5  7a  of the act was ultra vires the constitution and all the proceedings which were entertained against the petitioners by the income-tax officer, central circle vi, delhi, were without jurisdiction and void.
petitions numbers 44 of 1956 and 85 of 1956 the petitioner in petition number 44 of 1956 is shri a. l. sud, the sole proprietor of messrs. amritlal sud  construction  who originally belonged to hoshiarpur district in the state of punjab but has since 1948 been residing and carrying on business in calcutta.
prior to 29th june, 1955, he had been assessed to income-tax by the income-tax officer, special survey circle vii, calcutta.
on 29th june, 1955, the central board of revenue transferred his cast to the income-tax officer, special circle, ambala, and the said officer continued the proceedings in the transferred case and also instituted further proceedings against the petitioner and assessed him under section 23  4  of the act for the assessment years 1946-47 and 1947-48.
demands were made upon the petitioner for payment of the amount of income-tax thus assessed whereupon he filed this petition impeaching the validity of the order of the central board of revenue dated 29th june, 1955, and the proceedings entertained by the income-tax officer, special circle, ambala, on the ground that section 5  7a  of the act was ultra vires the constitution.
petition number 85 of 1956 was filed by messrs. bhagwan das sud sons, merchants, hoshiarpur, but on that date their case was transferred under section 5  7a  of the act by the commissioner of income-tax officer, special circle, ambala.
the said officer continued the said case and reopened the assessment for the years 1944-45 to 1950-51 and completed the assessment for the assessment years 1947-48, 1950-51 and 1951-52.
these petitioners also thereupon filed the petition challenging the validity of the order of transfer made by the commissioner of income-tax officer, special circle, ambala, thereafter, on the same ground of the ultra vires character of section 5  7a  of the act.
shri a. l. sud, the petitioner in petition number 44 of 1956, is a member of the hindu undivided family carrying on business in the name and style of messrs. bhagwan das sud sons and the cases of both these petitioners were transferred to the income-tax officer, special circle, ambala, as above, by the said respective orders.
petition numbers 86 of 1956, 87 of 1956, 88 of 1956, iii of 1956, 112 of 1956, and 158 of 1956 these petitions may be compendiously described as the amritsar group.
the petitioner in petition number 86 of 1956 is sardar gurdial singh, son of s. narain singh, son of s. narain singh.
the number 87 of 1956 is dr. sarmukh singh, son of s. narain singh.
the petitioner in petition number 112 of 1956 is s. ram singh, son of s. narain singh.
these three are brothers and the petitioner in petition number 88 of 1956 is father, s. narain singh, son of s. basdev singh.
the father and the three sons were the directors in the hidustan embroidery mills  private  limited, petitioner number 1 in petition number 111 of 1956, which is located at chheharta near amritsar.
all these petitioners were

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

, prior to the orders of transfer made by the commissioner of income-tax officer a ward, amritsar, but their cases were transferred on or about june 29, 1953, from the income-tax officer, a ward.
amritsar, to the income-tax officer, special circle, amritsar.
these cases were continued by the latter officer and notices under section 34 of the act were also issued by him against them for the assessment years 1947-1948 to 1951-52.
each one of them filed a separate petition challenging the said orders of transfer by the commissioner of income-tax and the proceedings entertained by the income-tax officer, special circle, amritsar, against them on the score of the unconstitutionality of section 5  7a  of the act.
the petitioner in petition number 158 of 1956 is one shri ram saran das kapur, the head and karta of the hindu undivided family carrying on business outside ghee mandi gate, amritsar.
his case also which, prior to the order complained against, was being entertained by the income-tax officer, f ward, amritsar, was transferred on some date in 1954 by an order of the commissioner of income-tax officer, special circle, amritsar.
no objection was taken by the petitioner to this order of transfer until after the assessment order was passed against him, but he also challenged the validity of the said order of transfer and the proceedings entertained by the income-tax officer, special circle, amritsar, thereafter on the same grounds as the other petitioners.
petitions numbers 211 of 1956 to 215 of 1956 these petitions may be described as the sriram jhabarmull group.
though separately filed, the petitioner in each of them is the same individual, nandram agarwalla, who is the sole proprietor of a business which he carries on under the name and style of sriram jhabarmull.
it is a business inter alia of import and export of piece-goods, as commission agents, and dealers in raw wool and other materials.
the principal place of business is at kalimpong, in the district of darjeeling, though there is also a branch at calcutta.
these petitions concern the assessment of the petitioner to income-tax for the respective years 1944-45, 1945-46, 1946-47, 1947-48 and 1948-49.
prior to the orders of the commissioner of income-tax under section 5  7a  of the act complained against, the petitioner was being assessed by the income-tax officer, jalpaiguri, darjeeling.
on march 15, 1946, the cases of the petitioner were transferred from the income-tax officer, jalpaiguri, darjeeling, to the income-tax officer, central circle i, calcutta, and a couple of months thereafter they were again transferred to the income-tax officer, central circle iv, calcutta.
on 8th june, 1946, there was a further transfer assigning the cases to the income-tax officer, central circle, central circle i, calcutta, and on 27th july, 1946, orders were passed by the commissioner of income-tax, central, calcutta, under section 5  7a  transferring the cases of the petitioner to the income-tax officer, central circle, iv, calcutta.
these are the orders which are complained against as unconstitutional and void invalidating the proceedings which were continued and subsequently instituted by the income-tax officer, central circle iv, calcutta, against the petitioner on the score of the unconstitutionality of section 5  7a  of the act.
it may be noted, however, that these orders were all prior to the constitution and having been made on 27th july, 1946, as aforesaid were followed up by completed assessment proceedings in respect of the said respective years and also certificate proceedings under section 46  2  of the act.
there were further order dated 15th december, 1947, and sometime in september, 1948, transferring the cases of the petitioner from the income-tax officer, central circle iv, calcutta, to the income-tax officer, central circle i, calcutta, and back from him to the income-tax officer, central circle iv, calcutta.
these, however, are not material for our purposes, the only order challenged being the order of the commissioner of income-tax central, calcutta.
these, however, are not material for our purposes, the only order challenged being the order of the commissioner of income-tax central, calcutta dated 27th july, 1946, which was passed under section 5  7a  of the act.
petitions numbers 225 of 1956 to 229 of 1956 these petitions may be classed as the raichur group.
they concern the assessment of the respective assessment years 1950-51, 1951-52, 1952-53, 1953-54 and 1954-55.
the petitioner in each of them is the same individual, one kalloor siddanna, who resides and carries on business in raichur in the state of hyderabad as commission agent and distributor of agricultural products.
income-tax was first imposed in the hyderabad state in 1946 by special act of the legislature and the petitioner was assessed under the hyderabad income-tax act by the additional income-tax officer, raichur, for the assessment years 1948-49 and 1949-50.
as from 1st april, 1950, the indian income-tax act was applied to hyderabad but the additional income-tax officer, raichur, continued to assess the petitioner.
the cases in respect of the assessment years 1950-51, 1951-52 and 1952-53 were pending before that officer and proceedings were taken in connection with the assessment for those years.
on 21st december, 1953, however, the commissioner of income-tax, hyderabad, issued a notification under section 5  7a  ordering that the case of the petitioner should be transferred from the additional income-tax officer, raichur, to the income-tax officer, special circle, hyderabad.
the latter officer continued the assessment proceedings and issued notices under section 22  4  of the act on 1st july, 1954, 2nd november, 1954, 30th november, 1954, 19th december, 1954, and 11th march, 1955, in respect of the said years of assessment.
assessments for the said years were made on 21st march, 1955, and on 24th april, 1955, the petitioner made an application under section 27 of the act to reopen the assessment for the year 1950-51 as on default under section 23  4  of the act.
it appears, however, that shortly before 19th may, 1955, the commissioner of income-tax, hyderabad, made another order under section 5  7a  and section 64  5   b  of the act transferring all the cases of the petitioner to the main income-tax officer, raichur.
curiously enough, the petitioner challenged both the orders, one dated 21st december, 1953, and the other made sometime in may, 1955, under section 5  7a  of the act and the proceedings continued and instituted by the respective officers thereunder as unconstitutional and void on the ground that section 5  7a  was ultra vires the constitution even though ultimately he was being assessed by the main income-tax officer, raichur, under the latter order.
this is the common question regard to the ultra vires character of section 5  7a  of the act which is raised in all these petitions, though in regard to each group there are several questions of fact involving the consideration of the discriminatory character of the specific orders passed therein which we shall deal with hereafter in their appropriate places.
section 5  7a  of the act runs as under 5.  7a  the commissioner of income-tax may transfer any case from one income-tax officer subordinate to him to another, and the central board to revenue may transfer any case from any one income-tax officer to another.
such transfer may be made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render necessary the reissue of any notice already issued by the income-tax officer from whom the case is transferred.
this sub-section was inserted by section 3 of the indian income-tax amendment act, 1940  xl of 1940  which was passed as a result of the decision of the bombay high court in dayaldas kushiram v. commissioner of income-tax,  central .
by the indian income-tax amendment act, 1956  xxvi of 1956 , an explanation was added to section 5  7a  in the terms following as a result of the decision of this court in bidi supply company v. the union of india and others explanation in this sub-section case in relation to any person whose name is specified in the order of transfer means all proceedings under this act in respect of any year which may be pending on the date of the transfer, and includes all proceedings under this act which may be commenced after the date of the transfer in respect of any year.
section 5  7a  together with the explanation thus falls to be considered by us in these petitions.
the argument on behalf of the petitioners is that section 64, subsections  1  and  2 , of the act confer upon the assessee a valuable right and he is entitled to tell the taxing authorities that he shall not be called upon to attend at different places and thus upset is business.
section 5  7a  invests the commissioner of income-tax and the central board of revenue with naked and arbitrary power to transfer any case from any one income-tax officer to another without any limitation in point of time, a power which is unguided and uncontrolled and is discriminatory in its nature and it is open to the commissioner of income-tax or the central board of revenue to pick out the case of one assessee from those of others in a like situation and transfer the same from one state to another or from one end of india to the other without specifying any object and without giving any reason, thus subjecting the particular assessee to discriminatory treatment whereas the other assessee similarly situated with him would continue to be assessed at the places where they reside or carry on business under section 64  1  and  2  of the act.
section 64  5  which provides with retrospective effect that the provisions of section 64  1  and  2  shall not apply, inter alia, where an order as been made under section 5  7a  was inserted simultaneously with section 5  7a  and would not have the effect of depriving the assessee of the valuable right conferred upon him under section 64  1  and  2  unless and until section 5  7a  was intra vires but section 5  7a  as stated above being discriminatory in its nature is ultra vires the constitution and cannot save section 64  5  which is merely consequential.
the discrimination involved in section 5  7a  is substantial in character and therefore infringes the fundamental right enshrined in article 14 of the constitution.
it also infringes article 19  1   g  in so far as it imposes an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right to carry on trade or business vide himmatlal harilal mehta v. state of madhya pradesh.
the very same question as regards the unconstitutionality of section 5  7a  of the act had come up for decision before this court in bidi supply company v. union of india and others.
the case of the assessee there had been transferred by the central board of revenue under section 5  7a  of the act from the income-tax officer, district iii, calcutta, to the income-tax officer, special circle, ranchi.
the order was an omnibus wholesale order of transfer expressed in general terms without any limitation as to time and was challenged as void on the ground that section 5  7a  under which it had been passed was unconstitutional.
this court, by a majority judgment, after discussing the general principles underlying article 14, did not adjudicate upon that question, observing at page 724 we do not consider it necessary, for the purpose of this case, to pause to consider whether the constitutionality of sub-section  7a  of section 5 can be supported on the principle of any reasonable classification laid down by this court or whether the act lays down any principle for guiding or regulating the exercise of discretion by the commissioner or board of revenue or whether the sub-section confers an unguided and arbitrary power on those authorities to pick and choose an individual assessee and place that assessee at a disadvantage in comparison with other assessees.
it is enough for the purpose of this case to say that the omnibus order made in this case is not contemplated pr sanctioned by sub-section  7a  and that, therefore, the petitioner is still entitled to the benefit of the provisions of sub-section  1  and  2  of section 64.
all assessees are entitled to the benefit of those provisions except where as particular case or cases of a particular assessee for a particular year or years is or are transferred under sub-section  7a  of section 5, assuming that section to be valid and if a particular case or cases is or are transferred his right under section 64 still remains as regards his other case or cases.
the majority judgment then proceeded to consider the effect of such an omnibus order unlimited in point of time on the rights of the assessee and further observed in that context at pates 724-5 this order is calculated to inflict considerable inconvenience and harassment on the petitioner.
its books of account will have to be produced before the income-tax officer, special circle, ranchi - a place hundreds of miles from calcutta, which is its place of business.
its partners or principal officers will have to be away from the head office for a considerable period neglection the main business of the firm.
there may be no suitable place where they can put up during that period.
there will certainly be extra expenditure to be incurred by way of railway fare, freight and hotel expenses.
therefore the reality of the discrimination cannot be gainsaid.
in the circumstances this substantial discrimination has been inflicted on the petitioner by an executive fiat which is not founded on any law and no question of reasonable classification for purposes of legislation can arise.
here the state which includes its income-tax department has by an illegal order denied to the petitioner, as compared with other bidi merchants who are similarly situate, equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws and the petitioner can legitimately complain of an infraction of his fundamental right under article 14 of the constitution.
the question as to the constitutionality of section 5  7a  of the act was thus left open and the decision turned merely on the construction of the impugned order.
learned counsel for the petitioners, however, lays particular stress on the observations of bose, j., in the minority judgment which he delivered in that case whereby he held that sections 5  7a  and 64  5   b  of the act were themselves ultra vires article 14 of the constitution and not merely the order of the central board of revenue.
the learned judge referred to a passage from the judgment of fazl ali, j., in state of west bengal v. anwar ali sarkar and also pointed out the decision of this court in dwarka prasad laxmi narain v. state of uttar pradesh and two others and observed what is the position here ?
there is no hearing, no reasons are recorded just peremptory orders transferring the case from one place to another without any warning and the power given by the act is to transfer from one end of india to the other nor is that power unused.
we have before us in this court a case pending in which a transfer has been ordered from calcutta in west bengal to ambala in the punjab.   page 729 .
if the legislature itself had done here what the central board of revenue has done and had passed an act in the bald terms of the order made here transferring the case of this petitioner, picked out from others in a alike situation, from one state of another, or from one end of india to the other, without specifying any object and without giving any reason, it would, in my judgment, have been bad.
i am unable to see how the position is bettered because the because the central board of revenue has done this not parliament.   page 730  in my opinion, the power of transfer can only be conferred if it is hedged round with reasonable restrictions, the absence or existence of which can in the last instance be determined by the courts and the exercise of the power may be in conformity with the rules of natural justice, that is to say, the parties affected must be heard when that is reasonably possible, and the reasons for the order must be reduced, however briefly, to writing so that men may know that the powers conferred on these quasi judicial bodies are being justly and properly exercised.   page 732 .
the answer furnished on behalf of the state of this argument is four fold  i  that the provision contained in section 5  7a  of the act is a measure of administrative convenience enacted with a view to more conveniently and effectively deal with the cases of the assessees where the commissioner of income-tax considers it necessary or desirable to transfer any case from one income-tax officer subordinate to him to another or the central board of revenue similarly considers it necessary or transfer any case from any one income-tax officer to another.
the real object with which section 5  7a  was inserted by the indian income-tax amendment act, 1940  xl of 1940 , has been thus set out in the affidavit of shri v. gouri shankar, under-secretary, central board of revenue, dated november 19, 1956, which is the pattern of all the affidavits filed on behalf of the state in these petitions 4.
i say that the provisions of section 5  7a  were inserted by the income-tax amendment act, xl of 1940, with the object of minimising certain procedural difficulties.
before this amendment was passed there was no specific provision in the act for transferring a case from one income-tax officer to another except by a long and circuitous course even at the request of the assessee or for dealing with cases involving special features such as cases of assessee involving wide-spread activities and large ramifications or inter-related transactions, power to transfer cases was conferred upon the central board of revenue and the commissioner of income-tax as the case may be.
i say that the provisions of section 5  7a  are thus administrative in character,  ii  that the assessee whose case is thus transferred is not subjected to any discriminatory procedure in the matter of his assessment.
the income-tax officer to whom his case is transferred deals with it under the same procedure which is laid down in the relevant provisions of the act.
the decision of the income-tax officer is subject to appeal before the appellate assistant commissioner and the assessee has the further right to appeal to the income-tax appellate tribunal and to approach to the high court and ultimately the supreme court, as provided in the act.
all assessees, whether they are assessed by the income-tax officer of the area where they reside or carry on business or their cases are transferred from one income-tax officer to another, are subject to the same procedure and are entitled to the same rights and privileges in the matter of redress of their grievances, if any, and there is no discrimination whatever between assessees and assessees  iii  that the right, if any, conferred upon the assessee under section 64  1  and  2  of the act is not an absolute right but is circumscribed by the exigencies of tax collection and can be negatived as it has been in cases where the commissioner of income-tax or the central board of revenue, as the case may be, think it necessary or desirable to transfer his case from one income-tax officer to another under section 5  7a  of the act having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
the argument of inconvenience is thus sought to be met in the same affidavit 5.
i further say that as a result of any transfer that may be made under the provisions of section 5  7a  there is no discriminatory treatment with regard to the procedure and that no privileges and rights which are given to the assessee exposed to any increased prejudice, punitary consequences or differential treatment.
i say that in cases where transfer under this section are made otherwise than on request from assessees, the convenience of the assessees is taken into consideration by placing the case in the hands of an income-tax officer who is nearest to the area where it will be convenient for the assessee to attend.
if on account of administrative exigencies this is not possible and the assessee requests that the examination of accounts or evidence to be taken should be in a place convenient to him, the income-tax officer complies with the requests that the examination of accounts or evidence to be taken should be in a place convenient to him, the income-tax officer complies with the request of the assessee and holds the hearing at the place requested.
even if there be difference between assessees who reside or carry on business in a particular area by reason of such transfers the difference is not material.
it is only a minor deviation from a general standard and does not amount to a denial of equal rights  iv  that the power which is thus vested is a discretionary power and is not necessarily discriminatory in its nature and that abuse of power is not to be easily assumed hwhere discretion is vested in such high officials of the state.
even if abuse of power may sometimes occurs, the validity of the provision cannot be contested because of such apprehension.
what may be struck down in such cases is not the provision itself but the discriminatory application thereof.
the petitioners rejoin by relying upon the following passage from the judgment of fazl ali, j., in state of west bengal v. anwar ali sarkar, which was referred to by bose, j., in his minority judgment in bidi supply company v. the union of india, at page 281 it was suggested that the reply to this query is that the act itself being general and applicable to all persons and to all offences, cannot be said to discriminate in favour of or against any particular cases or classes of persons or cases, and if any charge of discrimination can be leveled at all, it can be leveled only against the act of the executive authority if the act is misused.
this kind of argument however does not appear to me to solve the difficulty.
the result of accepting it would be that even where discrimination is quite evident one cannot challenge the act simply because it is couched in general terms and one cannot also challenge the act of the executive authority whose duty it is to administer the act, because that authority will say i am not to blame as i am acting under the act.
it is clear that if the argument were to be accepted article 14 could be easily defeated.
i think the fallacy of the argument lies in overlooking the fact that the insidious discrimination complained of is incorporated in the act itself, it being so drafted that whenever any discrimination is made such discrimination would be ultimately traceable to it.
the pivot of the whole argument of the petitioners is the provisions contained in section 64  1  and  2  of the act which prescribe the place of assessment.
they are 64.  1  where an assessee carries on a business, profession or vocation at any place, he shall be assessed by the income-tax officer of the area in which that place is situate or, where the business, profession or vocation is carried on in more places than one, by the income-tax officer of the area in which the principal place of his business, profession or vocation is situate.   2  in all other cases, an assessee shall be assessed by the income-tax officer of the area in which he resides.
these privations were construed by the bombay high court in dayaldas kushiram v. commissioner of income-tax,  central , and another, and beaumont, c.j., observed at page 146 in my opinion, section 64 was intended to ensure that as far as practicable an assessee should be assessed locally, and the area to which an income-tax officer is appointed must, so far as the exigencies of tax collection allow, bear some reasonable relation to the place where the assessee carries on business or resides.
kania, j.,  as he then was  went a step further and stated at page 149 a plain reading of the section shows that the same is imperative in terms.
it also gives to the assessee a valuable right.
he is entitled to tell the taxing authorities that he shall not be called upon to attend at different placers and thus upset his business.
the learned judges there appear to have treated the provisions of section 64  1  and  2  more as a question of right than as a matter of convenience only.
if there were thus a right conferred upon the assessee by the provisions of section 64  1  and  2  of the act and that right continues to be enjoyed by all the assessees except the assessee whose case is transferred under section 5  7a  of the act to another income-tax officer outside the area where the resides or carries on business, the assessee can urge that, as compared with those other assesses, he is discriminated against and is subjected to inconvenience and harassment.
it is, therefore, necessary to consider whether any such right is conferred upon the assessee by section 64  1  and  2  of the act.
prima facie it would appear that an assessee is entitled under those provisions to be assessed by the income-tax officer of the particular area where he resides or carries on business.
even where a question arises as to the places of assessment such question is under section 64  3  to be determined by the commissioner of the commissioners concerned if the question is between places in more states than one or by the central board of revenue if the latter are not in agreement and the assessee is given an opportunity of representing his views before any such question is determined.
this provision also goes to show that the convenience of the assessee is the main consideration in determining the place of assessment.
even so the exigencies of tax collection have got to be considered and the primary object of the act, viz., the assessment of income-tax, has got to be achieved.
the hierarchy of income-tax authorities which is set up under chapter ii of the act has been so set up with a view to assess the proper income-tax payable by the assessee and whether the one or the other of the authorities will proceed to assess a particular assessee has got to be determined not only having regard to the convenience of the assessee but also he exigencies of tax collection.
in order to assess the tax payable by an assessee more conveniently and efficiently it may be necessary to have him assessed by an income-tax officer of an area other than the one in which he resides or carries on business.
it may be that the nature and volume of his business or that he is so connected with various other individuals or organizations in the way of his earning his income as to render such extra-territorial investigation necessary before he may be properly assessed.
these are but instances of the various situations which may arise wherein it may be thought necessary by the income-tax officer of the area in which he resides or carries on business to another income-tax officer, whether functioning in the same state pr beyond it.
this aspect of the question was emphasized by beaumont, c.j., in dayaldas kushiram v. commissioner of income-tax,  central , at page 146 when he used the expression as far as practicable in connection with the assessees right to be assessed locally and the expression so far as exigencies of tax collection allow in connection with the appointment of the income-tax officer to assess the tax payable by the particular assessee.
in the later case of dayaldas kushhiram v. commissioner of income-tax,  central , beaumont, c.j., expressed himself as follows the income-tax act does not determine the place of assessment.
what it does is to determine the officer who is to have power to assess and in some cases it does so by reference to locality but i apprehend that an appeal would be not against an order of the commissioner as to the place of assessment, but against an order of the assessment of the income-tax officer, this aspect was further emphasized by the federal court in wallace brothers company limited v. commissioner of income-tax, bombay sind baluchistan, where spens, c.j., observed clause  3  of section 64 provides that any question as to the place of assessment shall be determined by the commissioner or by the central board of revenue.
the third proviso the clause enacts that it the place of assessment is called in question by the assessee, the income-tax officer shall, if not satisfied with the correctness of the claim, refer the matter for determination under this sub-section before assessment is made.
these provisions clearly indicate that the matter is more one of administrative convenience than of jurisdiction and that in any event it is not one for adjudication by the court.
it may be noted, however, that in the passage at page 719 of the majority judgment in bidi supply company v. the union of india and others, this court regarded the benefit conferred on the assessee by these provisions of section 64  1  and  2  of the act as a right to be assessed by the income-tax officer of the particular area where he resides or carries on his business is conferred on the assessee.
this right, however, according to the authorities above referred to, is hedged in with the limitation that it has to yield to the exigencies of tax collection.
the position, therefore, is that the determination of the question whether a particular income-tax officer should assess the case of the assessee depends on  1  the convenience of the assessee as posited in section 64  1  and  2  of the act, and  2  the exigencies of tax collection and it would be open to the commissioner of income-tax and central board of revenue who are the highest amongst the income-tax authorities under the act to transfer to case of a particular assessee from the income-tax officer of the area within which he resides or carries on business to any other income-tax officer if the exigencies of tax collection warrant the same.
it is further to be noted that the infringement of such a right by the order of transfer under section 5  7a  of the act is not a material infringement.
it is only a deviation of a minor character from the general standard and does not necessarily involve a denial of equal rights for the simple reason that even after such transfer the case is dealt with under the normal procedure which is prescribed in the act.
the production and investigation of the books of account, the enquiries to be made by the income-tax officer are the same in a transferred case as in others which remain with the income-tax officer of the area in which the other assessees reside or carry on business.
there is thus no differential treatment and no scope for the argument that the particular assessee is discriminated against with reference to others similarly situated.
it was observed by this court in m. k. gopalan v. state of madhya pradesh in support of the objection raised under article 14 of the constitution, reliance is placed on the decision of this court in anwar ali sarkars case.
that decision, however, applies only to a case where on the allotment of an individual case to the special court authorised to conduct the trial by a procedure substantially different from the normal procedure and prejudicing them thereby.
in the present case, the special magistrate under section 14 of the criminal procedure code has to try the case entirely under the normal procedure, and no discrimination of the kind contemplated by the decision in anwar ali sarkars case, and the other cases following it, arises here.
a law vesting discriminatory as such, and is therefore not hit by article 14 of the constitution.
there is, therefore, no substance in this contention.
to a similar effect were the observations of mukherjea, j.,  as he then was  in state of west bengal v. anwar ali sarkar, at page 325 i agree with the attorney-general that if the differences are not material, there may not be any discrimination in the proper sense of the word and minor deviations from the general standard might not amount to denial of equal rights.
it is pointed out that as section 64  5  stands at present, the provisions of section 64  1  and  2  do not apply and are deemed never at any time to have applied to an assessee where, in consequence of any transfer made under section 5  7a , a particular income-tax officer has been charged with the function of assessing that assessee.
section 64  5  was incorporated by the income-tax law amendment act, 1940  xl of 1940  simultaneously with section 5  7a .
it is, therefore, urged that an assessee whose case has been thus transferred has no right under section 64  1  and  2  and those assessees alone who do not come within the purvi