--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

item number126 court number9 section xv supreme court of india record of proceedings civil appeal no s .
5840 of 2004 m s. qazi noorul h.h.h.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

petrol pump anr appellant  s  versus dy. director, e.s.i. corporation respondent s   with appln s  for exemption from filing o.t.,directions and prayer for interim relief and office report    date 29/07/2009 this appeal was called on for hearing today.
coram honble mr. justice markandey katju honble mr. justice h.l. dattu for appellant s  mr. dinesh dwivedi, sr.
adv.
mr. prateek dwivedi, adv.
ms. vandana mishra, adv.
mr. manish kumar, adv.
mr. ashutosh kr. sharma, adv.for mr. shail kumar dwivedi,adv.
for respondent s  mr. v.j. francis,adv.
upon hearing counsel the court made the following order the appeal is dismissed in terms of the reportable signed order.
no costs.   parveen kr.
chawla    indu satija  court master court master reportable signed order is placed on the file reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 5840 of 2004 m s. qazi noorul h.h.h.
petrol pump another appellants versus dy.director, esi corporation respondent order heard learned counsel for the parties.
this appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment of the allahabad high court dated 24th january, 2003 passed in civil misc.
writ petition number53564 of 2002.
by the impugned judgment, the high court has dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant herein.
the appellant is running a petrol pump  public retail outlet  for dispensing petrol diesel.
he filed the aforesaid writ petition number 53564 of 2002 in the high court of allahabad challenging an order dated 17th october, 2002 issued by the deputy director, employees state insurance corporation, regional office, kanpur directing the appellant to make contribution under the employees state insurance act, 1948  for short the act  from august, 1993 to may, 2000 and interest on the aforesaid amount failing which recovery shall be issued under sections 45-c and 45-g of the act.
the short question in this case is whether the appellant is covered by the act.
section 1 4  of the act states that the act, in the first instance, shall apply to all factories.
section 2 12  of the act provides  12  factory means any premises including the precincts thereof--  a  whereon ten or more persons are employed or were employed for wages on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on, or  b  whereon twenty or more persons are employed or were employed for wages on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on, but does not include a mine subject to the operation of the mines act, 1952  35 of 1952  or a railway running shed  the expressions manufacturing process as well as power used in the act have been given the same meaning as in the factories act, 1948, vide sections 2 14-aa  and section 2 15-c  of the act.
section 2 k  of the factories act, 1948 defines manufacturing process as follows  k  manufacturing process means process for--   i  making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal, or  ii pumping oil, water, sewage or any other substance, or  iii generating, transforming or transmitting power, or  iv composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, photogravure or other similar process or book binding  v constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or vessels or  vi preserving or storing any article in cold storage a perusal of the aforesaid provision shows that pumping oil is also a manufacturing process.
in this connection, it may be stated that the words manufacturing process in different statutes have different meanings.
for instance, in the central excise act, 1944, the word manufacture means bringing into existence a different commodity, though this is not the definition of manufacturing process in the factories act, 1948.
we cannot apply the definition of manufacturing process in one statute to another statute.
section 2 k , sub-clause  ii  of the factories act, 1948 states that pumping oil is a manufacturing process.
admittedly, the appellant does the work of pumping oil.
when we go to a petrol pump for getting petrol or diesel, the petrol or diesel is in a tank and it does not on its own flow from the tank to the pipe and thereafter into the vehicle, but only by means of a pump by using power.
learned counsel appearing for the appellant has submitted that we should see the object and intention of the statute.
it is well settled that once the statute is clear, the literal rule of interpretation applies, and there is no need to go into the object and intention of the statute  vide article entitled a note on interpretation of statutes by markandey katju, j., published in the journal section of air 2007 sc page 22 .
in the present case, section 2 14-aa  of the act states that manufacturing process shall have the meaning assigned to it in the factories act, 1948.
in the factories act, 1948, section 2 k  of the act includes pumping oil as a manufacturing process.
in our opinion, the only rule of interpretation which applies to the facts of the present case is the literal rule of interpretation, which means that we should go simply by the wording of the statute and nothing else and there is no scope for applying any other rule of interpretation.
in our opinion, the language used in section 2 k  ii  of the factories act, 1948 is clear.
hence, the act applies to the appellant and the respondent was right in issuing notice to the appellant for making contribution and interest thereon for the period in question.
accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.
no costs.
however, we reduce the rate of interest to 10 on the principal amount.
.j.
markandey katju new delhi .j.
july 29, 2009.
h.l. dattu