--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner p.d. aggarwal ors.
vs. respondent state of u.p. ors.
date of judgment08/06/1987 bench ray, b.c.  
j  bench ray, b.c.  
j  sen, a.p.  
j  citation 1987 air 1676 1987 scr  3  427 1987 scc  3  622 jt 1987  2  606 1987 scale  1 1283 act constitution of india--arts.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

14 and 16--validity of rr. 3 c , 5, 6 and 23 of the u.p. service of engineers  build- ings and roads branch , 1936 as amended by the amendment rules of 1969 and 1971--assistant engineers substantively appointed to temporary posts prior to the amendment of the rules are entitled to have their seniority reckoned from the date of their appointment irrespective of the posts, held by them remaining temporary--rights vested in them under the 1936 rules cannot be taken away by giving retrospective effect to the amendment rules of 1969 and 1971.
headnote rule 3 c  of the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  class ii rules, 1936 defined direct recruitment or direct appointment as recruitment or appointment of assistant engineers in the manner prescribed in r. 5 i ,  ii  and  iii  thereof, after consultation with the public service commission.
rule 6 empowered the govern- ment to decide in each case the source from which a vacancy shall be filled up provided that 25 of the vacancies were reserved for promotion of persons selected from subordinate services.
rule 3 b  thereof defined a member of the serv- ice as a government servant appointed in a substantive capacity.
rule 23 stipulated that seniority in the service shall be determined by the date of order of appointment to the service.
by an office memorandum dated december 7, 1961, the state government laid down that direct recruitment to the posts of assistant engineers would be made on the results of a competitive examination conducted by the commission, the successful candidates being appointed in the order of merit against vacant permanent posts and, those following, against temporary posts.
it was further laid down that while 50 of the permanent vacancies in the department would be filled by direct recruitment, 25 of them would be filled by selection from amongst the temporary assistant engineers recruited through the commission and for this purpose the temporary assistant engineers already working in the department who were appointed on the advice of the commission prior to the introduction of the new scheme and who 428 possessed the requisite qualifications were given relaxation in the age limit upto 40 years for appearing in the competi- tive examinations to be conducted by the commission.
as a measure of further concession to the existing temporary assistant engineers, it was provided that initially 50 of the permanent vacancies would be filled up by selection of temporary assistant engineers and only 25 thereof would be filled up by direct recruitment.
the competitive examina- tions were held commencing from the year 1962.
on july 28, 1969, the state government brought into force the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  class ii  amendment  rules, 1969 with retrospective effect from march, 1962 amending inter alia rr 3 b , 3 c , 5 and 6 of the 1936 rules to bring them in line with the scheme enunciated in the office memorandum dated december 7, 1961.
on november 26, 1971, r. 23 was amended by the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  class ii  amendment  rules, 1971 as under except as provided for hereunder seniority in the service will be determined by the date of order of appointment in a substantive vacancy .
the competitive examinations for direct recruitment of assistant engineers in accordance with the new scheme were held upto the year 1971 and were discontinued by the execu- tive instruction contained in office memorandum dated june 23, 1972 as it was felt that the system had done more harm than good to the service.
the respondents, who were directly recruited assistant engineers appointed, after consultation with the commission, to temporary posts in the cadre upto 1961 challenged the seniority list prepared in 1980 in terms of the office memorandum dated december 7, 1961 and the amendment rules, 1969 and 1971 as violative of arts.
14 and 16 of the consti- tution and prayed for determination of their seniority on the basis of the length of their continuous service in terms of the decision of this court in baleshwar dass ors.
v. state of u.p. ors., 1981 1 s.c.r.
449.
the high court allowed the petitions and directed preparation of a fresh seniority list by treating the appointments of respondents as substantive appointments to the cadre.
the appellants in these appeals were those temporary assistant engineers working in the department who were selected for appointment to permanent vacancies 429 on the results of the competitive examinations held by the commission.
dismissing the appeal, this court, held there is no controversy that all those assistant engineers who were substantively appointed to temporary posts in consultation with the commission and had been rendering their service for long years till 1961 have become members of the service in accordance with the provisions of the rules.
therefore, on the basis of r. 23 as it was before the amendment made in 1971, these assistant engineers are entitled to have their seniority reckoned from the date of their being members of the service, no matter whether they are holding posts which remain as temporary for years to- gether.
the direct recruits appointed on the basis of the examination held under the amended rules cannot encroach upon their rights in the matter of determination of their seniority.
442e-h 2. this court, in baleshwar dass ors.
v. state of u. p. ors., 1981 1 s.c.r.
449, while holding that office memorandum dated december 7, 1961 was not arbitrary in so far as it fixed the proportion of permanent vacancies to be filled from various sources, observed that this scheme of 1961 could not stand in isolation and had to be read as subordinate to the 1936 rules.
hence, the aforesaid office memorandum does not affect the petitioners who have become members of the service and are entitled to have their sen- iority reckoned from the date of their being members of the service in accordance with r. 23 of the 1936 rules.
440g-h 441a-b 3. the effect of the amendments made in rr. 3 b , 3 c , 5 and 6 is that assistant engineers who have become members of the service being appointed substantively in temporary posts will no longer be members of the service and will have to wait till they are selected and appointed as assistant engineers under r. 5 a  ii  against quota fixed by r. 6 for this purpose.
this creates serious prejudice to them and it also creates uncertainty as to when they will be selected and appointed against the quota set up for such selection under r. 5 a  ii .
the amended r. 23 lays down that seniori- ty will be determined from the date of order of appointment in substantive vacancy.
these provisions have been made retrospectively effective from march 1, 1962 to the existing officers i.e., the respondents appointed substantively against temporary vacancies.
such retrospective amendments cannot take away the vested rights.
444h a-b 430 t.r. kapur v. state of haryana ors., jt  1986  s.c. 1092 e.p. royappa v. state of tamil nadu, a.i.r. 1974 s.c. 555 and maneka gandhi v. union of india, a.i.r. 1978 s.c. 597 relied on.
4. the assistant engineers who have already become members of the service on being appointed substantively against temporary posts have already acquired the benefit of 1936 rules for having their seniority computed from the date of their becoming members of the service.
the amendment rules, 1969 and 1971 take away this right of these temporary assistant engineers by expressly providing that those as- sistant engineers who are selected and appointed in perma- nent vacancies against 50 quota provided by amended r. 6 will only be considered for the purpose of computation of seniority from the date of their appointment against perma- nent vacancies.
therefore, the temporary assistant engineers are not only deprived of their seniority but they are driven to a very peculiar position inasmuch as they have to wait until they are selected and appointed against permanent vacancies in the quota set up for this purpose by the amend- ed r. 6.
there are about 200 assistant engineers who have been appointed substantively by the government with the approval of the public service commission before the en- forcement of 1969 rules.
the direct recruits appointed on the basis of the examination against permanent vacancies will get precedence over assistant engineers appointed in the matter of determination of their seniority in the cadre of assistant engineers on the basis of changed rules, par- ticularly amended r. 23, which takes into account only appointments in substantive vacancies.
the 1969 and 1971 amendments in effect take away from the officers appointed to the temporary posts after selection by the public service commission, the substantive character of their appointment.
these amendments are not only disadvantageous to the future recruits against temporary vacancies but they were made applicable retrospectively from march 1, 1962 even to exist- ing officers recruited against temporary vacancies through public service commission.
the government has power to make retrospective amendments to the rules but if the rules purport to take away the vested rights and are arbitrary and not reasonable then such retrospective amendments are sub- ject to judicial scrutiny.
446b-h 447a-c s.b. patwardhan v. state of maharashtra, 1977 3 s.c.r.
775, referred to.
5. the office memorandum dated december 7, 1961 which purports to amend the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  class ii rules, 1936 cannot override, amend or supersede 431 statutory rules as it is nothing but an administrative order or instruction.
the temporary assistant engineers who have become members of the service after being selected by the public service commission in accordance with the service rules are entitled to have their seniority reckoned in accordance with the provisions of r. 23 as it was then, from the date of their becoming members of the service, and this cannot be taken away by giving retrospective effect to the amendment rules of 1969 and 1971 as it is arbitrary, irra- tional and not reasonable.
448b-d sant ram sharma v. state of rajasthan anr., 1968 1 s.c.r.
111, referred to.
6. the amendment rules of 1969 read with the amendment rules of 1971 adversely affect the rights of the assistant engineers appointed to substantive posts prior to the intro- duction of these amended rules and create fetters for the long years of service being ever considered for reckoning of seniority in the cadre of assistant engineers.
for promotion from assistant engineer to the post of executive engineer seniority-cum-merit is the criterion.
these temporary as- sistant engineers, unless they are selected to the 50 quota in permanent vacancies reserved for promotion from the assistant engineers appointed to temporary posts, will never have their service reckoned for determination of seniority in the cadre.
the respondents were appointed long before the appointment of appellants as assistant engineers in perma- nent vacancies.
the appointment of respondents has been made in consultation with the public service commission and according to the decision in baleshwar dasss case the respondent having become members of the service they are deemed to be appointed substantively in temporary posts.
therefore, the amended rules, more particularly rr. 3 c , 5 and 6 of 1969 rules as well as r. 23 of 1971 amended rules are wholly arbitrary and discriminatory and are violative of arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
448e f 449a-b mohammad shujat ali ors.
v. union of india ors., 1975 1 s.c.r.
449, referred to.
7. the argument that the amendment rules were framed to attract meritorious and talented engineers in the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  as there were very little prospects of promotion for such assistant engineers to be promoted to the higher posts owing to the large number of assistant engineers appointed to temporary posts cannot be sustained, firstly, because it 432 seriously prejudices the rights of the assistant engineers appointed substantively to the temporary posts and working as assistant engineers for a number of years and secondly, because this process of direct recruitment against permanent vacancies was discontinued after 1971 as it worked injustice and had led to patent discrimination.
449c-f 8.
when recruitments to a particular service are made from more than one source, quota and rota may be introduced consistent with the equality clause envisaged in arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
in the instant case all the assistant engineers whether appointed in a temporary post of the cadre or in the permanent post of the cadre are recruit- ed directly from graduates in civil engineering.
the only difference is that due to exigencies of service a large number of assistant engineers were recruited against tempo- rary vacancies.
under the 1936 rules the assistant engineers appointed against temporary vacancies became members of the service under the then r. 3 and they were eligible for their seniority being reckoned from the date of their becoming members of the service.
the impugned rules of 1969 and 1971 purport to take away or to cruelly cut off the long years of valuable service rendered by these assistant engineers only on the pretext of appointment against permanent posts.
these temporary assistant engineers after introduction of the amended rules have been relegated to a very uncertain posi- tion as to when they will be selected against permanent vacancies by the commission in the 50 quota provided under r. 6 of the amended rules to become members of service and to have their seniority reckoned.
the fate of those assist- ant engineers who are selected and appointed in temporary posts on the basis of the results of the examination is also very uncertain inasmuch as they will be considered for selection by the commission against the quota for temporary assistant engineers after the assistant engineers appointed before them are all considered for selection in the said quota set up for the temporary assistant engineers in perma- nent vacancies even though they have been appointed through the same process of examination.
considering all these circumstances we are constrained to hold that the impugned rr. 3 c , 5 and 6 of the 1969 rules and r. 23 of the 1971 rules are arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable infringing arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
451g-h 452a-f narender chadha v. union of india ors., 1986 1 s.c.j.
307, referred to.
state of jammu kashmir v. triloki nath khosa, 1974 1 s.c.r.
771, distinguished.
433 9. purely ad hoc employees or employees on purely offi- ciating basis or employees purely for a temporary period in the cadre of assistant engineer, being not members of the service in accordance with the service rules, are not enti- tled to have the benefit of their such adventitious, purely ad hoc and temporary service being reckoned for determina- tion of seniority unless and until they become members of the service in accordance with the provisions of service rules.
only those ad hoc appointees whose services have been regularised by the regularisation rules framed under proviso to art.
309 of the constitution after being duly selected by the selection committee and becoming members of the service, will be entitled to seniority only from the date of order of appointment after selection in accordance with those regula- tions as provided in r. 7 of the regulations.
453h, 454a-c ashok gulati and ors.
v. d.s.
jain ors., a.i.r. 1987 s.c. 424 and state of gujarat v.c.g.
desai, 1974 2 s .c .r.
255, referred to.
judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal numbers 622625 of 1982.
from the judgment and order dated 14.1.82 of the allaha- bad high court in w.p. numbers 3387/79, 3327, 2829/80 and 747/81.
shobha dixit, s. markandeya, m.n. shroff, anil kumar gupta.
a.k. sanghi, v.j. francis, p.d. sharma, a.k.
panda, sunil kumar jain and r.b. mehrotra for the appearing par- ties.
the judgment of the court was delivered by b.c. ray, j. these appeals by special leave are against the common judgment and order dated 14.1.1982 quashing the seniority list in the cadre of assistant engineers in the united provinces  buildings roads branch  class ii pre- pared on 29.7.1980 and 18.12.1980 with 19.12.1980.
a writ of mandamus was also issued to the state government for prepa- ration of fresh seniority list in respect of assistant engineers in the civil engineering wing and electrical and mechanical wing respectively in accordance with the guide- lines mentioned in the said judgment.
the facts giving rise to these writ petitions are in brief as follows- previously public health department as well as the irrigation department of the government of uttar pradesh were integrated into public works department comprising both these two branches.
in 1922 irrigation branch was separated into a different inde- pendent department.
similarly, in 1927 public health depart- ment was separated.
in 1936 u.p. service of engineers class ii rules  buildings and roads branch  pertaining to p.w.d.
were framed in exercise of powers conferred under the gov- ernment of india act.
identical rules also governed the irrigation department.
before entering into the controversy that has been raised in the instant appeal it is appropriate to refer to the relevant provisions of the said rules.
rule 3 b  defines member of the service as a government servant appointed in substantive capacity, under the provisions of these rules or of rules in force previous to the introduc- tion in the cadres of the service.
clause  c  defines direct recruitment or direct appointment as recruitment or appointment in the manner prescribed in rule 5 i ,  ii  and  iii  of these rules.
in rule 4 which is captioned as strength of cadre it is mentioned in clause  ii  of the said rule that the government may increase the cadre by creating permanent or temporary posts from time to time as may be found necessary.
rule 5 lays down five sources of recruitment  i  by direct appointment from amongst engineer students who have passed out of thomson civil engineering college, roorkee, and who have completed a course of training in the buildings and roads branch as engineer students after consulting the public service commission  ii  by the appointment after  sic  advertisement and after consulting the public service commission  iii  by the appointment of officers in the temporary service of the united provinces public works department, buildings and roads branch, after consulting the public service commission provided that it will not be necessary to consult the commission in the case of appointment of a temporary officer to a permanent vacancy if he has already been appointed to a temporary post in the cadre of service after consultation with the commission.   iv  by promotion of members of the united provinces subordinate engineering service in the public works department, buildings and roads branch, who have shown exceptional merits  v  by promotion of computers in the public works depart- ment, buildings and roads branch, who have shown exceptional merit and who are technically qualified.
it has been specifically provided in rule 6 that the government will decide in each case the source from which a vacancy shall be filled up provided that 25 of the vacan- cies shall be reserved for selected qualified members of the subordinate engineering service and computers.
it thus provides that barring 25 of the vacancies to be filled by promotion from engineering subordinate services and comput- ers, the remaining 75 of the vacancies are to be filled up by direct recruitment as provided in sub-clause  ii  and  iii  of rule 5. rule 17 which is termed as probation specifically provides that all persons appointed to the service, who are not already in the permanent employ of the buildings and roads branch of the united provinces government, shall be placed on probation for four years, provided that such of them as have undergone training as engineer students, or have served as temporary engineers in the buildings .and roads branch of the united provinces government, may be permitted to count the period of such training and service, respectively towards this period of probation.
rule 19 deals with confirmation of probationers.
it mentions that a probationer shall be confirmed in his ap- pointment after he has completed the prescribed period of probation, has passed all the tests prescribed in the rules and the government is satisfied that he is fit for confirma- tion.
it also provides therein that all confirmations under this rule shall be notified in the united provinces gazette.
rule 23 states that seniority in the service shall be determined according to the date of order of appointment to it provided that if the order of appointment of two or more candidates bears the same date, their seniority inter-se shall be determined according to the order in which their appointment has been notified.
on december 7, 1961 an office memorandum number 4162 ebr xxiii-pwd-90 ebr 1954 was issued by the government laying down the principles for recruitment to the permanent and temporary posts.
it is stated therein that in future direct recruitment to both permanent and temporary vacancies of assistant engineers  civil, electrical and mechanical  in the public works, irrigation and local self government engineering departments, will be made on the results of competitive examination to be conducted by the public serv- ice commis- sion.
candidates possessing technical and other qualifica- tions prescribed in the rules for the uttar pradesh service of engineers in the departments concerned will be eligible to appear at the examination for that particular service.
it has been further provided therein that successful candidates in order of merit will be appointed on probation against vacant permanent posts and those following will be appointed against temporary posts.
it also lays down the manner of filling up the vacancies in the permanent cadre of the service of assistant engineers in the irrigation department as well as in the pwd department.
in pwd department 50 of the vacancies in the permanent cadre will be filled up through competitive examination, 25 by promotion from amongst overseers and computers and 25 by selection from amongst temporary assistant engineers recruited through the commission.
it has been further provided that as a measure of concession to the existing temporary assistant engineers who were recruited as temporary assistant engineers on the advice of the public service commission prior to the intro- duction of this scheme, the distribution of vacancies in the permanent cadre of assistant engineers will be 25 by direct recruitment through competitive examination 25 by promo- tion from subordinate service and 50 by selection from amongst existing temporary assistant engineers.
it has also been provided that the government may in consultation with the public service commission increase or decrease the percentage fixed for recruitment by selection and competi- tive examination in any particular year.
in para 7 of the said memorandum it has been provided that temporary and officiating assistant engineers possessing the requisite technical qualifications will be eligible to appear in the competitive examinations and the maximum age limit in the case of those working in the department with the approval of the commission, or after having been recruited by the com- mission will be 40 years.
thereafter on 28.7.1969 an amendment to the rule was made by the government in exercise of power under proviso to article 309 of the constitution.
this is known as the united provinces service of engineers  buildings and roads branch , class ii  amendment  rules, 1969.
these rules shall be deemed to have been in force since march, 1962.
the relevant provisions of these rules are quoted hereinbelow- rule 3 in these rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context-  a  the service means the u.p. service of engineers  build- ings and roads branch , class ii,  b  member of the service means a government servant appointed in a substantive capacity, under the provisions of these rules or of rules in force previous to the introduc- tion of these rules to a post in the cadre of the service.   c  direct recruitment or direct appointment means recruitment or appointment in the manner prescribed in rule  5  a   i  and 5 b  1   d  commission means the uttar pradesh public service commission  e  department means the public works department, uttar pradesh  f  governor means the governor of uttar pradesh.   g  secretary means the secretary to government public works department, uttar pradesh  h  chief engineer means the chief engineer, public works department, uttar pradesh.   i  period of recruitment means the period upto the end of december in the calendar year succeeding year in which the recruitment or selection is made  j  citizen of india means a person who is or is seemed to be citizen of india under part ii of the constitution of india  k  government means the government of uttar pradesh.
rule 5 source of recruitment- recruitment to the post of assistant engineer shall be made from the following sources-  a  in permanent vacancies-  i  by direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination conducted by the commission  ii  by selection from amongst the officers appointed as assistant engineer by direct recruitment through the commission and working in temporary or officiating vacancies in the department  iii  by promotion of members of the public works department, subordinate engineering service and the public works department computers service.   b  in officiating or temporary vacancies--  i  by direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination conducted by the commission  ii  by promotion of members of the public works department, subordinate engineering service, and public works department computers service.
rule 6 number to be recruited from each source--the governor shall decide the number of appointments to be made at each selection in each kind of post from the sources speci- fied in rule 5 provided that recruitment in substantive vacancies occurring during a period of recruitment in the post of assistant engineer, shall, so far as may be possible, be made from the source mentioned in rule 5 a  in the following proportion-  a  fifty per cent of the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment on the results for a competitive examination under rule 5 a  i   b  twenty five per cent of the vacancies shall be filled from the source specified in rule 5 a  ii .   c  twenty-five per cent of the vacancies shall be filled from the source specified in rule 5 a  iii  which shall be shared by members of the public works department subordinate engineering service and the public works department computers service in approximate proportion of permanent strength of their respective cadres at the time of selection provided further that with a view to giving facility to tempor- ary assistant engineers recruited in the department in consultation with the commission up to the date commencement of the first competitive examination in accordance with these rules, the proportion of vacancies to be filled from the three sources mentioned in the first proviso shall be 25 per cent, 50 per cent and 25 per cent respectively subject to review at the discretion of the government in consultation with the commission.
explanation--the vacancies from the source mentioned in rule 5 a  ii  will, until further orders, be filled from amongst those temporary assistant engineers only who were recruited in the department in consultation with the commission and were working in this capacity on the date of commencement of first competitive examination provided also that recruitment to temporary or officiating vacancies in the posts of assistant engineers by promotion from the source mentioned in rule 5 b  ii  shall be made up to 25 per cent of the vacancies, occurring during any one period of recruitment in the same proportion as in clause  c  of the first proviso and the remaining vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment under rule 5 b  i .
note--the distribution of vacancies in the permanent cadre in the above manner will be subject to the condition that the governor, in consultation with the commission may, for special reasons, increase or decrease the percentage fixed for recruitment by selection and competitive examination in any particular period of recruitment.
on november 26, 1971 a further amendment to the u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch , class ii rules has been brought in and these rules are called u.p. service of engineers  buildings and roads branch  class ii  amendment  rules, 1971.
rule 23 which deals with seniority has been substituted.
the relevant portion of rule 23 is quoted hereunder- except as provided for hereunder seniority in the service will be determined by the date of order of appointment in a substantive vacancy on the basis of these amended rules of 1969 and 1971 exami- na- tions were held and the successful candidates in the said examinations were appointed to the permanent posts and they were placed on probation.
these appointees were called direct recruits in short d category.
the petitioner numbers 1, 2 and 4 who are appellants here in these appeals are those direct recruits.
the appellant numbers 1 and 2 who were working in the pwd as temporary assistant engineers after selection by the commission were successful in 1962 competi- tion for appointment against permanent posts.
the appellant number 3 who was also working as temporary assistant engineer in the pwd after selection by the public service commission in 1962 also competed in the examination held in 1964 for appointment against a permanent post.
the appellant number 4 who was working in the irrigation department after selection by the commission in 1962 was successful for appointment against one of the permanent posts in pwd through 1964 competitive examination.
it may be mentioned in this connec- tion that the first competitive examination was held in 1962 on the basis of the memorandum dated december 7, 1961.
the next examination was held in 1964.
similar examinations were held thereafter till 1971 in accordance with the amended rules.
the shukla committee in para 36 of its report ob- served that the system had done more harm than good to the service and ultimately recommended that in future such direct recruitment for permanent posts should be discontin- ued.
no examinations were held in 1963.
after 1971 the recruitment by this method was discontinued by executive instructions issued in 1972 vide office memorandum dated 23.6.1972  annexure c2 to the counter affidavit of s.c. gupta dated 23.1.81 in writ petition number 3327 of 1980 syed masood tagi zaidi v. state of u.p.    this was followed by another order dated 8.6. 1973  annexure c-3 ibid  stopping direct promotion against permanent vacancies.
these deci- sions were taken on the basis of the recommendations of shukla committees report.
the respondents are the directly recruited assistant civil engineers in the buildings and roads branch pursuant to the provisions of rule 5 a  ii  in the temporary posts of the cadre upto 1961 after consultation with the public service commission.
these temporary assistant engineers who are working continuously since the date of their appointment in the cadre of assistant engineers have questioned the seniority list of assistant engineers made by the government in 1980 pursuant to the office memorandum dated december 7, 1961 and u.p. engineering service  amendment  rules of 1969 and 1971 on the grounds that they are arbitrary and discrim- inatory being violative of articles 14 and 16 of the consti- tution.
these amended rules have been challenged further on the ground that these rules adversely affect their service conditions and as such prayed for quashing of the seniority list and for determina- tion of their seniority on the basis of the decision ren- dered by this court in baleshwar dass ors.
v. state of u. p. ors., 1981 1 scr 449 on the basis of the length of their continuous service since the date of their becoming member of the service in accordance with the provisions of the 1936 rules.
the high court of allahabad allowed these writ petitions and quashed the 1980 seniority list directing to prepare a seniority list after taking the appointments of officers to the service after selection by public service commission to be substantive appointments to the