--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner avinder singh etc. vs. respondent state of punjab anr. etc. date of judgment19/09/1978 bench krishnaiyer, v.r. bench krishnaiyer, v.r. desai, d.a. citation 1979 air 321 1979 scr  1  845 1979 scc  1  137 citator info r 1979 sc1550  13  r 1979 sc1803  12  rf 1980 sc 738  9  f 1983 sc 762  19  r 1991 sc2096  30  act constitution of india-articles 14, 265-vice of excessive delegation-absence of guidelines-what can be delegated-imposing flat rate of taxation-choice of classification in taxing statute.
punjab municipalities act, 1976-sec.
90 punjab municipal act, 1911-sec.
62a-double taxation if prohibited by art.
265.
headnote the municipalities of punjab are governed by two enactments.
the numerous little ones are statutory bodies created and controlled by the punjab municipal act, 1911 and few large ones by the punjab municipal corporation act, 1976.
for the purpose of the present petitions the provisions run on identical terms.
the state of punjab in april, 1977 required the various municipal bodies in the state to impose tax on the sale of indian made foreign liquor re. 1/- per bottle w.e.f.
20-5-1977.
the municipal authorities having failed to take action pursuant to the directive the state of punjab directly issued a notification under sec.
90 5  of the punjab municipal corporation act, 1976 and similar provision of the municipal act, 1911.
the petitioner challenged the constitutional validity of the said statutes and levy on the following grounds 1. section 90 2  b  of the act suffers from the vice of excessive delegation or legislative abdication.
2. there are no guidelines for the exercise of the wide fiscal power of the corporation or government which make it too unreasonable to be salvaged by art.
19 5  and too arbitrary to be equal under art.
14.
3. the order imposing the tax itself is vitiated because  a  it seeks to impose the tax which is already imposed and, therefore, violates section 90  4   b  there is double taxation  c  it levies too heavy taxation  
d  picking out from the broad spectrum of luxury goods or intoxicants the indian made foreign liquor amounts to discrimination  e  no opportunity of being heard was given  f  unequals are being treated equally by imposing re. 1/- per bottle irrespective of the type of liquor taxed, price of the liquor and alcoholic content.
dismissing the appeal.
held  1  there is nothing in art.
265 of the constitution prohibiting double taxation.
850 d 846 cantonment board poona v. western india theatres limited, air 1954 bom.
261 approved.  
b  the plea that flat rate of re. 1/- per bottle be it on brandy or other stronger beverage or be it rs.
50/- or rs. 500/- per bottle cannot be seriously pressed.
in the field of taxation many complex factors enter the fixation and flexibility is necessary for the taxing authority.
850e-f moopil nair  k.t.  
v. state of kerala, 1961 3 scr 77 east india tobacco company v. state of a.p., 1963 1 scr 404 at 406 a. hajee abdul shakoor company v. state of madras.
1964 8 scr 217 at 230 referred to.  
2  if the municipal body proposed to impose a tax it is required to offer an opportunity to the residents of area.
no such procedural fetter is to be found under sec.
90 5  if the levy is imposed by the state government.
it is impossible for the court to imply invitation of objections.
no taxation without representation is not applicable to a government controlled by an elected legislature exercising its power of taxation.
852b, c, d  3  sec. 90 4  talks of tax not already imposed.
the sales tax imposed by the state legislature under the punjab general sales tax act 1948 is no bar to the present levy.
section 90 deals with the levy of taxes for municipal corporation.
the injunction is confined to repetition of the taxes which the municipality has already imposed.
if the corporation has not already imposed the tax.
the embargo is absent.
it is of no moment that some other body, including the state legislature has already entered the field.
the question is has the municipal committee or corporation under this act already exacted a similar tax ?
852f, h, 853bc  4  the founding document of the nation has created the three great instrumentalities and entrusted them with certain basic powers-legislative, judicative and executive.
abdication of these powers by the concerned instrumentalities, amounts to betrayal of the constitution and it is intolerable in law.
the legislature cannot delegate the essential legislative functions.
the legislature is responsible to the people and its representative, the delegate may not be and this is why excessive delegation have been frowned upon by constitutional law.
however, the complexities of modern administration are so bafflingly intricate and bristle with details, urgencies difficulties and the need for flexibility is such that our legislature may not get off to a start if they must directly and comprehensively handle legislative business in all their plenitude and particularisation.
dele

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

gation of some part of legislative power becomes a compulsive necessity for viability.
of course, every delegate is subject to the authority and control of the principal and exercise of delegated power can always be directed or cancelled by the principal.
therefore, even if there be delegation, parliamentary control over delegated legislation should be a living continuity as a constitutional necessity.
853gh, 854a, b, c, d, e devi das gopal krishnan ors.
v. state of punjab ors., 1967 3 scr 557 at 565 p. n. kaushal etc. v. v. union of india ors.
1979 1 scr 122 corp. of calcutta anr.
v. liberty cinema, 1963 2 scr 477 referred to.
the taxes levied under the act can be utilised only for the purpose of the act.
there is a clear purpose contained in the provisions about the purpose and limit of the tax.
what is needed for the purpose of the act by way of financial resources may be levied by the corporation.
beyond that not.
moreover the 847 items on which taxes may be imposed are also specified.
thus the legislature has fixed the purpose of the taxation, objects of the taxation and limits of the taxation.
856a-b it is too late in the day to contend that the jurisprudence of delegation of legislative power does not sanction parting with the power to fix the rate of taxation, given indication of the legislative policy with sufficient clarity.
860 b when the government is imposing taxes for the municipality the government is bound to know what ought to have been done by the municipality.
the whole scheme of the statute shows that government has an important role to play in the running of the municipalities.
the financial control over the corporation is with the state government.
865e as between the two interpretations that which sustains the validity of law must be preferred.
864e m. k. papiah sons v. the excise commr.
anr., 1975 3 scr 607 sita ram bishambhar dayal v. state of u.p., 1972 2 scr 141 referred to.
judgment original jurisdiction writ petitions numbers 4038, 4147, 4148, 4149, 4150, 4202, 4204, 4207, 4213, 4215, 4222, 4224, 4227, 4232, 4236, 4246, 4249, 4251, 4259, 4311, 4343 4347 of 1978.   under article 32 of the constitution .
v. m. tarkunde, p. h. parekh, c. b. singh and mukul mudgar for the petitioners in w.p. numbers 4038 and 4244/78.
yogeshwar prasad, mrs. rani chhabra and miss m. bali for the petitioners in w.p. numbers 4147-4150, 4207, 4232 and 4343/78.
b. r. kapur and s. k. sabharwal for the petitioners in w.p. numbers 4213, 4215, 4246, 4249, 4311, 4224 and 4227/78.
o. p. sharma for the petitioners in w.p. numbers 4222, 4259/78.
pramod swarup for the petitioner in w.p. 4347/78.
shreepal singh for the petitioner in w.p. 4236/78.
m. p. jha for the petitioner in w.p. 4251/78.
m. c. bhandare  in w.p. 4204 and 4227/78 only  mrs. s. bhandare, a. n. karkhanis and miss malini poduval for r. 3  in w.p. 4204, 4227/78  and for r. 3 in 4215 and for r. 3-4 in 4249/78.
g. l. sanghi  in w.p.
4038/78 only  s. k. mehta, k. r. nagaraja, p. n. puri and g. lal for municipality  rr  in w.p. 4038, 4207, 4215, 4249, 4227.
hardev singh and r. s. sodhi for the state of punjab in  w.p. 4038/78 .
bishamber lal for the state of punjab in  w. p. 4147/78 .
naunit lal for municipal committee  r.6  in w.p. 4249 and for r. 4 in 4227/78.
the judgment of the court was delivered by krishna iyer, j.-this heavy bunch of writ petitions impeaching the validity of a tax on foreign liquor raises a few familiar legal riddles.
a rupee per bottle sold within every municipal town or city is the impugned levy, meant, according to the punjab government, to serve the twin purposes of replenishing the resources of municipal bodies reduced by house tax exemptions and of weaning drinkers from overly consuming foreign liquor as a prohibitionist gesture.
to pick the pocket of every spirituous bibber of the higher brackets by a tiny tax may be but a feeble homage to art.
47 of the constitution, and to finance welfare projects with this tainted tax may be queer gandhiana.
the will to enforce dry sobriety in society and to abolish massive human squaller by fleecing the fat few, is made of sterner stuff, maybe.
but matters of means and ends, of police and morality, are largely for the legislature and validity is the province of the court.
we let slip the observation only because, from a certain angle, these dual grounds make odd companions and add to the credibility gap, although our focus is solely on the legality of the levy.
it is better to begin with the story of the tax under challenge.
the petitioners are all licensees to trade in foreign liquor including indian made foreign liquor.
they are either wholesalers or retailers and pay excise duty and other fees and taxes including sales tax under the general sales tax law which imposes a levy of 10 per cent, on sales of foreign liquor.
there are also octroi levies of 10 per cent, and educational tax of 2 per cent, and these add up to a considerable burden but the commodity taxed is foreign liquor, indian made or other, whose consumer usually belongs to the well to do sectors.
the municipalities of punjab are governed by two enactments.
the numerous little ones are statutory bodies created and controlled by the punjab municipal act, 1911 and the few large ones by the punjab municipal corporation act, 1976  the act, for brevity, hereafter .
for our purposes, the provisions run on identical terms and so we will take up the latter statute which compresses into one section a plurality of sections in the former, and set out the common scheme to study the critical issues raised.
arguments have been addressed only on this basis.
the immediate facts which have launched the litigative rocket need to be narrated now to get a hang of the core questions in their correct perspective.
the state of punjab, in april 1977, under its statutory power s. 90 4  required the various municipal bodies in the state to impose a tax on the sale et al, of foreign liquor at the rate of re. 1/- per bottle with effect from may 20, 1977.
the municipal authorities having tarried too long or totally failed to take action pursuant to this directive, the state directly entered the fiscal arena and issued a notification under s. 90 5  dated may 31, 1977, which reads thus whereas the government of punjab, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section  4  of section 90 of the punjab municipal corporation act, 1063-a-pslg- 77/12170, dated 11th april, 1977, required of the municipal corporation of ludhiana in punjab to impose tax on the sale of indian made foreign liquor at the rate of rupee one per bottle, by the 20th may, 1977.
2. and whereas, the municipal corporation of ludhiana has failed to carry out the aforesaid order of the punjab government within the stipulated period.
3. now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section  5  of section 90 of the punjab municipal corporation act, 1976, the president of india is pleased to impose modify the tax on the sale of indian made foreign liquor within the municipal corporation of ludhiana at the rate of rupee one per bottle.
the tax shall come into force with effect from 1st june, 1977.
l.s. bindra joint secretary to govt.
punjab local government department this notification, issued under s. 90 5  read with s. 90 2  b  of the act, was later modified marginally but survives substantially.
the petitioners  licensees  challenge its vires both as contrary to the statutory provision  s. 90  and as violative of the constitution.
the triple shapes of the fatal constitutional pathology are that  a  s. 90  2  b  of the act suffers from the vice of excessive delegation or legislative abdication  b  there are no guidelines for the exercise of the vagariously wide fiscal power of the corporation or government which make it too unreasonable to be salvaged by art.
19 5  and too arbitrary to be equal under art.
14 and  c  the order itself is vitiated by multiple infirmities.
the principal invalidatory charge, based on the act, is that s. 90 4  interdicts any tax already imposed.
the present tax is on sales and there is, under the general sales tax law, already a like levy on sales of foreign liquor in the state, and so the second fiscal venture is beyond governments power.
we have to consider these grounds of attack on the notification which are the emphatic submissions of shri tarkunde who led the arguments.
there are more subsidiary submissions urged by other counsel on a lower key, though, but we have to deal with them too in due course.
briefly, they are  a  that in picking out for taxation, from the broad spectrum of luxury goods or intoxicants, foreign liquor alone, discrimination has been practised,  b  that even assuming that government can exercise the power of the municipal body, it may not do so without adhering to the procedural fairness implied in the explanation to s. 90 2  applicable to municipal bodies and  c  that unequals are being treated equally because the tax of re. 1/- bottle at a flat rate disregards germane considerations like the price of the liquor or the degree of alcoholic content.
a feeble plea that the tax is bad because of the vice of double taxation and is unreasonable because there are heavy prior levies was also voiced.
some of these contentions hardly merit consideration, but have been mentioned out of courtesy to counsel.
the last one, for instance, deserves the least attention.
there is nothing in art.
265 of the constitution from which one can spin out the constitutional vice called double taxation.   bad economics may be good law and vice versa .
dealing with a somewhat similar argument, the bombay high court gave short shrift to it in western india theatres 1 .
some undeserving contentions die hard, rather survive after death.
the only epitaph we may inscribe is rest in peace and dont be re- born if on the same subject-matter the legislature chooses to levy tax twice over there is no inherent invalidity in the fiscal adventure save where other prohibitions exist.
likewise, the plea that a flat rate of re. 1/- per bottle, be it brandy or other stronger beverage or be it rs. 50/- or rs. 500/- per bottle, cannot be seriously pressed.
in the field of taxation many complex factors enter the fixation and flexibility is necessary for the taxing authority to make a reasonably good job of it.
moopil nairs case 2  does not discredit as unconstitutional anathema all flat rates of taxation.
maybe, in marginal cases where the virtual impact of irrationally uniform impost on the same subject is glaringly discriminatory, expropriatory and beyond legislative competence, different considerations may arise but to condemn into invalidity a tax because it is levied at a conveniently flat rate having regard to the commodity or service which has a high range of prices and the minimal effect on the overall price, its easy means of collection and a variety of other pragmatic variables, is an absurdity, especially because in fiscal matters large liberality must be extended to the government having regard to the plurality of criteria which have to go into the fiscal success of the measure.
of course, despite this forensic generosity, if there is patent discrimination in the sense of treating dissimilar things similarly or vice-versa, the court may treat the tax as suspect and scrutinise its vires more closely.
in the present case, intoxicating liquids falling in the well-known category of foreign liquors form one class and a flat minimal rate of re. 1/- per bottle has no constitutional stigma of inequality.
it is so easy to conceive of innumerable taxes imposed in this manner in the daily governance of the country that illustrations are unnecessary.
as excisable articles go, foreign liquor is a distinct category and absence of micro-classification within the broad genus does not attract the argument of inequality.
likewise, picking and choosing within limits is inevitable in taxation.
the correct law is found in east india tobacco company 1  it is not in dispute that taxation laws must also pass the test of art 14.
that has been laid down recently by this court in moopil nair v. the state of kerala.
but in deciding whether a taxation law is discriminatory or not it is necessary to bear in mind that the state has a wide discretion in selecting the persons or objects it will tax, and that a statute is not open to attack on the ground that it taxes some persons or objects and not others.
it is only when within the range of its selection, the law operates unequally, and that cannot be justified on the basis of any valid classification, that it would be violative of art.
14.
the following statement of the law in willis on constitutional law page 587, would correctly represent the position with reference to taxing statutes under our constitution- a state does not have to tax everything in order to tax something.
it is allowed to pick and choose districts, objects, persons, methods and even rates for taxation if it does so reasonably the supreme court has been practical and has permitted a very wide latitude in classification for taxation.   see also abdul shakoor company case  2 .
the foreign liquor levy does not fail on this score.
shri yogeshwar prasad urged that s. 90 2  obligated the municipal body to offer an opportunity to the residents of the city to file objections to the tax proposed and consider them before finalising the impost.
this fair procedure must attach to the exercise of the power even under s. 90 5  and since that has not been done the impugned notification must fail.
it is clear from s. 90 that the scheme is that if the municipal corporation wishes to impose a tax under s. 90 2  it must go through the due process indicated in the proviso and secure governments approval.
but if government is to exercise its power under s. 90 5  no such procedural fetter is found in the section.
maybe, that power is different from procedure for its exercise but unless the statute insists, it is impossible for the court to imply invitation of objections and consideration thereof from the residents.
for this simple reason, there is no merit in the submission.
whether the failure to hear before fixing a tax has a lethal effect upon the fiscal power of the government under s. 90 5  also is of little moment although urged by the same counsel.
may be, it is desirable that the state acquaints itself with the actual sentiments of the denizens of the local area before imposing tax on them.
but it is not inherent in the constitutional requirements for the exercise of the states power of taxation that objections should be called for and considered.
no taxation without representation is a slogan with a different dimension and has nothing to do with a levy by a government controlled by an elected legislature exercising its power of taxation.
we are unable to accede to the contention that representations from the residents not having been invited the taxation notification is bad in law.
what is wholesome is different from what is imperative.
indeed, we are left with the two major arguments addressed by shri tarkunde and echoed or endorsed by other counsel.
even here, we may dispose of the submission based on the wording in s. 90 4 , namely, that taxing power under section can be exercised in respect of a particular impost only if that species of tax is not already imposed.
the power under s. 90 4  is permissible only if the tax is new and not already imposed.
the petitioners argument is that the tax is on sales and is clearly a sales tax.
there is already a sales tax on foreign liquor at the rate of 10 per cent, under the punjab general sales tax act, 1948.
so the present rupee tax is a second round in breach of the forbiddance in s. 90 4 .
simple enough, if the expression not already imposed in s. 90 4  is a ban on further tax whatever the statute but if the taboo is not on the topology of the tax but limited to the specific statute the contention is specious.
and it takes little reflection to hold the latter to correct view.
we must remember the statutory setting and the placement of the provision.
s. 90 occurs in chapter viii headed taxation.
that section prim- arily empowers municipal corporations to levy taxes.
s. 90 1  specifies a number of items many of which are taxed also at state level, e.g. lands, vehicles.
s. 90 2  is so widely worded that many taxes covered by it would already have been occupied field at the state or even central level.
the municipal body may not have any index of taxes already imposed by other bodies and they are many.
s. 90 would then be a precarious power, often an exercise in futility and frequently a litigative trap.
number that is not the meaning of the prohibition not already imposed.
the government exercises the power of the corporation under s. 90 5  and cannot enter what is forbidden ground for the latter.
and what is forbidden is that the municipal body shall not repeat the same tax, if it has imposed that tax earlier under that act.
the injunction is plain and is confined to repetition of those taxes which the municipality has already imposed.
if the corporation has not already imposed the tax proposed, the embargo is absent.
it is of no moment that some other body, including the state legislature has already entered the field.
the question is has the municipal committee or corporation, under this act, already exacted a similar tax?
if it has, the second exercise is anathema.
nobody has a case that the corporation has earlier taxed foreign liquor under this act.
therefore, the submission has no substance and we reject it.
the sole surviving ground of invalidation pressed by the petitioners which deserves serious examination is what we have outlined right at the outset, viz., that on the face of s. 90 2 ,  3 ,  4  and  5  read together, unconstitutionality is writ large, in the sense of naked and uncanalised power with every essential legislative function surrendered to the humour and hubris of the state executive.
if this charge be true the consequence is in no doubt.
the vice of unreasonableness and arbitrariness are manifestations of the same vice as has been pointed out in p. n. kaushal etc. 1 .
an examination of excessive delegation of legislative power takes us to the scheme of the act and insight into the dynamics of municipal administration.
certain fundamentals must be remembered in this context and then the text of the provision understood in the constitutional perspective.
the founding document of the nation has created the three great instrumentalities and entrusted them with certain basic powers-legislative, judicative and executive.
abdication of these powers by the concerned instrumentalities, it is axiomatic, amounts to betrayal of the constitution itself and it is intolerable in law.
this means that the legislature cannot self-efface its personality and make over, in terms plenary, the essential legislative functions.
the legislature is responsible and responsive to the people and its representatives, the delegate may not be and that is why excessive delegation and legislative hara kiri have been frowned upon by constitutional law.
this is a trite proposition but the complexities of modern administration are so bafflingly intricate and bristle with details, urgencies, difficulties and need for flexibility that our massive legislatures may not get off to a start if they must directly and comprehensively handle legislative business in all their plenitude, proliferation and particularisation.
delegation of some part of legislative power becomes a compulsive necessity for viability.
if the 500-odd parliamentarians are to focus on every minuscule of legislative detail leaving nothing to subordinate agencies the annual output may be both unsatisfactory and negligible.
the lawmaking is not a turnkey project, ready-made in all detail and once this situation is grasped the dynamics of delegation easily follow.
thus, we reach the second constitutional rule that the essentials of legislative functions shall not be delegated but the inessentials, however numerous and significant they be, may well be made over to appropriate agencies.
of course, every delegate is subject to the authority and control of the principal and exercise of delegated power can always be directed, corrected or cancelled by the principal.
therefore, the third principle that emerges is that even if there be delegation, parliamentary control over delegated legislation should be a living continuity as a constitutional necessity.
within these triple principles, operation delegation is at once expedient, exigent and even essential if the legislative process is not to get stuck up or bogged down or come to a grinding halt with a few complicated bills.
it is apt to excerpt here an oft-quoted observation from vasantlal maganbhai sanjanwala affirmed in devi das gopal krishnan ors 1  the constitution confers a power and imposes a duty on the legislature to make laws.
the essential legislative function is the determination of the legislative policy and its formulation as a rule of conduct.
obviously it cannot abdicate its functions in favour of another.
but in view of the multifarious activities of a welfare state, it cannot presumably work out all the details to suit the varying aspects of a complex situation.
it must necessarily delegate the working out of details to the executive or any other agency.
but there is a danger inherent in such a process of delegation.
an over burdened legislature or one controlled by a powerful executive may unduly overstep the limits of delegation.
it may not lay down any policy at all it may declare its policy in vague and general terms it may not set down any standard for the guidance of the executive it may confer an arbitrary power on the executive to change or modify the policy laid down by it without reserving for itself any control over subordinate legislation.
this self effacement of legislative power in favour of another agency either in whole or in part is beyond the permissible limits of delegation.
it is for a court to hold on a fair, generous and liberal construction of an impugned statute whether the legislature exceeded such limits.
but the said liberal construction should not be carried by the courts to the extent of always trying to discover a dormant or latent legislative policy to sustain an arbitrary power conferred on executive authorities.
it is the duty of the court to strike down without any hesitation any arbitrary power conferred on the executive by the legislature.
such being the basics, accepted by presidential profusion of this court, we have to examine whether any essential legislative function has been transplanted into the hands of government or corporation by the act, whether the delegation itself is an entrustment of overboard power, so unguided that the delegate may run amok and do what is arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of articles 14 and 19 of the constitution.
taxation is exaction and even expropriation and, therefore, the right to property is in peril when a fiscal measure is afoot.
article 10 comes into play when law is made for purposes of taxation and that law must comply with part iii. arbitrariness must be excluded in the law, for, if power is arbitrary it is potential inequality and art.
14 is fatally allergic to inequality before the law.
these generalities take us to the particularities of the present case.
shri tarkunde turned the forensic fusillade on the total absence of guidance and regulation anywhere in the statute, expressly or implicitly, and on a true construction, according to him, a blanket power has been vested by s. 90 on the corporation and, indubitably, on the government.
the jurisprudence of delegation of legislative power, as earlier mentioned, has been the subject matter of this courts pronouncements.
in the absence of the rate of taxation being indicated by the legislature, shri tarkunde and other counsel appearing on either side drew our attention to liberty cinema, 1  the land-mark case on the point.
the later decisions have affirmed the principle in liberty cinema.
but before we enter into a fuller discussion we may concretize the specific contention urged by counsel for the petitioners.
section 90 1  sets out certain items for taxation by the corporation.
the taxes so levied are to be utilised for the purposes of the act.
therefore, there is a clear directive contained in the provision about the purpose and limit of the tax.
what is needed for the purposes of the act by way of financial resources may be levied by the corporation.
beyond that, number if the corporation has a fancy for spending money on purposes unconnected with the act and seeks to levy a tax for the fulfillment of such extra- statutory objects the mis-adventure must fail.
moreover, the items on which taxes may be imposed are also specified.
thus, the legislature has fixed the purpose of the taxation, the objects of the taxation and the limits of the taxation.
in short, s. 90 1  is a textbook illustration of valid delegation by the legislature.
the offending area is approached as we move down to sub-section  2   b  which enables the corporation to levy any other tax which the state legislature has power to impose under the constitution.
the fiscal area is obviously specious and so the question directly arises whether this over-broad provision accords with or exceeds the principles of delegation.
sub-section  3  leaves the rates of levy to be specified by the government and the legislature, argue petitioners counsel, has given no indication of the minima or the maxima of such rates.
can such non-fixation of at least the maximum rate of taxation be upheld or does it enable the delegate to usurp the essential functions of the legislature ?
when we proceed further to sub-section  5 , the government is clothed with the power to notify the tax which the corporation shall levy and, in exercising this power, not even the wholesome obligation of receiving representations could considering objections, contained in the proviso to s. 90 2 , is present.
can such untrammeled power, liberated from local pressures and intimate appreciation of municipal needs, be sanctioned as within the deligible ambit ?
these are the substantial grounds of attack which we have to consider presently.
back to the liberty cinema case  supra , sarkar, j. who spoke for the majority overruled the contention that the levy in question was a fee and held that it was a tax and addressed himself to the question of excessive delegation of legislative functions to the municipal corporation because it left it entirely to the latter to fix the amount of the tax and provided no guidance for that purpose.
while what constitutes an essential feature cannot be delineated in detail it certainly cannot include a change of policy.
the legislature is the master of legislative policy and if the delegate is free to switch policy it may be usurpation of legislative power itself.
so we have to investigate whether the policy of legislation has been indicated sufficiently or even change of policy has been left to the sweet will and pleasure of the delegate in this case.
we are clearly of the view that there is fixation of the policy of the legislation in the matter of taxation, as a close study of s. 90 reveals and exceeding that policy will invalidate the action of the delegate.
what is that policy ?
the levy of the taxes shall be only for the purposes of the act.
diversion for other purposes is illegal.
exactions beyond the requirements for the fulfillment of the purposes of the act are also invalid.
like in s. 90 1 , s. 90 2  also contains the words of limitation for the purposes of this act and that limiting factor governs sub-sections  3 ,  4  and  5 .
sub-section  3  vests nothing new beyond sub-sections  1  and  2 .
sub- section  4  does not authorise the government to direct the corporation to impose any tax falling outside sub-section  1  or sub-section  2 .
sub-section  5  also is subject to a similar circumscription because the government cannot issue an order to impose a tax outside the limitation of sub- section  1  or sub-section  2 .
thus, the impugned provision contains a severe restriction that the taxation leviable by the corporation, or by the government acting for the corporation, shall be geared wholly to the goals of the act.
the fiscal policy of s. 90 is manifest.
no tax under guise of s. 90 2   b  can be charged if the purposes of the act do not require or sanction it.
the expression purposes of this act is pregnant with meaning.
it sets a ceiling on the total quantum that may be collected.
it canalises the objects for which the fiscal levies may be spent.
it brings into focus the functions, obligatory or optional, of the municipal bodies and the raising of resources necessary for discharging those functions-nothing more, nothing else.
in liberty cinema  supra  it was contended that the rate of tax was an essential feature of legislation and if the power to fix it were abandoned it amounted to abdication of legislative power.
after an exhaustive examination of the judgments of this court, sarkar, j. reached the conclusion that there was clear authority that the fixing of rates may be left to the non-legislative body.
the matter does not end here, since the delegate may under guise of this freedom tyrannies and exact exorbitant sums which the legislature would hardly have intended.
if this possibility exists and there is no guideline given to the non-legislative body in the matter of fixation of rates, the result may be a frustration of the legislative object itself.
for this reason, the court in the liberty cinema  supra  case observed as axiomatic no doubt when the power to fix rates of taxes is left to another body, the legislature must provide guidance for such fixation.
the question then is, was such guidance provided in the act ?
we first wish to observe that the validity of the guidance cannot be tested by a rigid uniform rule that must depend on the object of the act giving power to fix the rate.
it is said that the delegation of power to fix the rates of taxes authorised for meeting the needs of the delegate to be valid, must provide the maximum rate that can be fixed, or lay down rules indicating that maximum.
we are unable to see how the specification of the maximum rate supplies any guidance as to how the amount of the tax which no doubt has to be below the maximum, is to be fixed.
provision for such maximum only sets out a limit of the rate to be imposed and a limit is only a limit and not a guidance.
it seems to us that there are various decisions of this court which support the proposition that for a statutory provision for raising revenue for the purposes of the delegate, as the section now under consideration is, the needs of the taxing body for carrying out its functions under the statute for which alone the taxing power was conferred on it, may afford sufficient guidance to make the power to fix the rate of tax valid.   pp.
493-494  in the western india theatres case  supra  the power given to the corporation  of the city of poona , in terms very wide, to levy any other tax came to be considered from the point of view of abdication of legislative function.
the negation of this argument was based on the key words of limitation contained therein, namely, for the purposes of the act and it was held that this permits sufficient guidance for the imposition of the tax.
in devi das gopal krishnan ors.  supra  this court again considered a similar contention.
the crucial passage in the judgment of sarkar, j. was there extracted with approval by subba rao, c.j.
it  the municipal corporation  has to perform various statutory functions.
it is often given power to decide when and in what manner the functions are to performed.
for all this it needs money and its needs will vary from time to time, with the prevailing exigencies.
its power to collect tax, however, is necessarily limited by the expenses required to discharge those functions.
it has, therefore, where rates have not been specified in the statute, to fix such rates as may be necessary to meet its needs.
that, we think, would be sufficient guidance to make the exercise of its power to fix the rates valid.r pp.
562-563  in the municipal corporation of delhi 1  case , the proposition that where the power conferred on the corporation was not unguided, although widely worded, it could not be said to amount to excessive delegation, was upheld.
delegation coupled with a policy direction is good.
counsel emphasised that the court had made a significant distinction between the local body with limited functions