--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner promod chandra deb and others vs. respondent the state of orissa and others date of judgment 16/10/1961 bench sinha, bhuvneshwar p. cj  bench sinha, bhuvneshwar p. cj  das, s.k. sarkar, a.k. ayyangar, n. rajagopala mudholkar, j.r. citation 1962 air 1288 1962 scr supl.  
1  405 citator info f 1962 sc1305  12  rf 1963 sc 222  11  d 1963 sc 953  12  r 1964 sc1043  19,52,56,69,70,78,117,131,137 r 1964 sc1793  12  d 1966 sc 704  13  rf 1981 sc1946  18  act khor posh grant-maintenance allowance granted by ex-ruler of state-merger of state with the dominion of india-abrogation of grant by executive action-if an act of state-consitutional validity- constitution of india, arts.
14, 19 1   f , 31- extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947 47 of 1947 , ss.
3, 4, 5-administration of orissa states order, 1948, para.
4 b -states merger  governors provinces  order, 1949, ss.
3. 4,-government of india act, 1935  26 geo. 5, ch. 2  s. 299  1 .
headnote the petitioners, who were holders of khor posh grants from the rulers of talcher, bamra and kalahandi before these states merged with the dominion of india, challenged the constitutional validity of certain orders passed by the state 406 of orissa and the union of india annulling those grants which the petitioners claimed were based on the law and custom prevailing in these states relating to maintenance of the junior members of the ruling family.
the grant in controversy in petition number 79 of 1957, made by the ruler of talcher under order 31 of the rules and regulations of the state of talcher, 1937, originally of land but converted in 1944 into money grant, was regularly paid till april 1949.
the grant in petition number 167 of 1958, made by the ruler of bamra prior to january 1, 1948, was annulled on june 8, 1949, by the government of orissa as the delegate of the government of india under s. 4 of the extra provincial jurisdiction act 1947.
the petitioner in petition 168 of 1958 was the same as in the previous petition.
he was granted an increased allowance by the ruler of bamra on december 8, 1947.
the grant was recognised on june 11, 1949, but paid at a reduced rate from april 1, 1948, to july 1, 1957, and was annulled by a statement made on june 29, 1957, by the chief minister of orissa in legislature.
the allowance in favour of the first petitioner in petition number 4 of 1959 the widow of the late maharaja of kalahandi, fixed by the political department of the government of india in 1939, and the allowance granted to the second petitioner by the ruler, were paid till they were annulled by the aforesaid statement of the chief minister of orissa.
by the merger agreements signed by the rulers on or after december 14, 1947, sovereignty over these states vested in the dominion of india before january 1, 1948, and in exercise of its powers under s. 3 2  of the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947, which came into effect on december 24, 1949, the central government delegated its powers to the government of orissa to administer the states.
on january 1, 1948, the government of orissa in exercise of its powers under s. 4 of that act made an order called the administration of orissa states order, 1948, para.
4 b  of which provided, inter alia, that all prior laws, which included rules, regulations, byelaws and orders, whether based on custom or usage, would continue in force until altered or amended by an order under the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947.
by s. 3 of the states merger  governors provinces  order, 1949, which came into effect on august 1, 1949, these states became parts of the province of orissa.
section 4 of the order provided that all laws in force in a merged state before that day including orders made under ss. 3 or 4 of the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947, would continue in force until repealed modified or amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority.
the case of the petitioners was that by these provisions the grants were recognised by the new sovereign and their abrogation by executive action amounted to infringement 407 of fundamental rights guaranteed by arts.
14, 19 1  f  and 31 of the constitution a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the respondents in the first two petitions that the grants in question having been annulled prior to the constitution, no writs could issue thereunder
and it was urged, that in any view of the matter, the orders annulling the grant amounted to acts of state and their legality could not be canvassed in a municipal court.
held, that the preliminary objection had no substance and must fail.
since the grants at the time they were annulled had ceased to be grants of land and been converted to money allowances, payable periodically at regular intervals, every periodic deprivation gave the petitioners the right to approach the court and it was not until 1957 that the protracted correspondence between the parties for the revision of the impugned orders came to an end.
the ex

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

pression act of state means the acquisition of sovereignty by a state over foreign territory by conquest, treaty, cession or otherwise.
that act may take place on a particular date or by a gradual process but sovereign power, including the right to legislate for and administer the acquired territory, may be acquired before the merger.
no municipal court has, however, the power to judge the propriety or legality of such an act relating either to public or private rights nor can it enforce obedience to ordinary principles of international law relating to rights of private property which a new sovereign is presumed to respect.
individual citizens cannot enforce such rights even though they may be protected by the treaty since they are no parties to the stipulations.
it is only when the new sovereign recognises the municipal courts that they can have the power and jurisdiction to investigate and ascertain only such rights as it chooses to recognise either by legislation or agreement or otherwise.
recognition may be express or implied from its dealing with those rights.
such recognition, however, is a matter within thee jurisdiction of the municipal courts, but the onus of proving it must be on the claimant.
secretary of state of india v. mamachee boye sahaba,  1859  m.i.a.
476, cook v. sir james gordon sprigg, 1899 a.c. 572, secretary of state for india v. bai rajbai,  1915  l.r. 42 i.a. 229, vajesingji joravarsingji v. secretary of state for dia in council,  1924  l.r. 51 i.a. 357, dattatraya krishna rao kane v. secretary of state for india,  1930  l.r. 57 i.a. 318, secretary of state v. saudar rustam khan,  1911  l.r. 68 i.a. 109, state of saurashtra v. memon haji ismail hagi, 1960 1 s.c.r.
537 and jagannath agarwala v. state of orissa, 1962 i s.c.r.
205, referred to.
408 judged in the light of these principles, there could be no doubt that order 31 of the rules and regulations of the state of talcher, 1937, had the effect of law, having been continued in force by sub-para.   b  of para.
4 of the administration of orissa states order 1948, in the absence of any legislation to the contrary under the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947.
the said rules and regulations were existing law within the meaning of art.
327 of the constitution.
it was wholly immaterial whether the grant by the former ruler was a legislative or an executive act.
madharao phalke v. the state of madhya bharat, 1961 1 s.c.r.
957, thakur amar singhji v. state of rajasthan, 1955 2 s.c.r.
303 and m s. dalmia dadri cement company v. the commissioner of income-tax, 1959 s.c.r.
729, relied on.
the wide language of sub-par.   b  of para.   4  of the order of 1948, read with the explanation, left no manner of doubt that the new sovereign by that order had recognised the khorposh grant made to the petitioner.
it was not correct to say that the impugned order annulling the grant could be sustained under ss.
3 1  and  5  of the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947.
section 3 1 , properly construed, could not override s. 4 of the act and an order made thereunder by a competent authority could be superseded only by another under the section itself.
section 5 of the act could not be so construed as to authorise the abrogation of a law continued in force by s. 4 or an order passed thereunder the entire act must be read harmoniously so as to give effect to each one of its provisions.
it must, therefore, be held that the annulment by executive action was not justified.
it was not, therefore, necessary for disposing of this matter to consider whether the petitioner was entitled to the protection of s. 299 1  of the government of india act, 1935.
johnstone v. pedlar,  1921  l.r. 2 a.c. 262, considered.
since the order impugned by petition number 167 of 1958 was made in terms of s. 4 of the extra provincial jurisdiction act, 1947, it had the effect of law, and was not open to investigation by this court.
the right of the petitioner in petition number 168 of 1958, having been recognised on june 11, 1949, in modification of the grant by the ex-ruler and implemented, it could not be abrogated by a mere executive fiat.
the orders of annulment in petition 4 of 1959 must also for the same reasons be held to be unjustified.
409 per sarkar and mudholkar, jj.-section 299 1  of the government of india act, 1935 could be of no help to the grantee from an ex-ruler unless his right had been recognised by the new sovereign so as to enable him to establish the same in its municipal courts.
that section could only protect such rights as the new citizen had at the moment of his becoming a citizen of the dominion of india.
it did neither enlarge his rights nor cure any infirmity in them.
state of gujarat v. jamadar mahomed abdulla 1962 3 s.c.r.
970, referred to.
judgment original jurisdiction petitions numbers 79 of 1957, 167 and 168 of 1958 and 4 of 1959.
petition under art.
32 of the constitution of india for enforcement of fundamental rights.
a. v. viswanatha sastri and k. r. choudhri, for the petitioner  in petn.
number 79 of 1957 .
purushottam trikamdas and r. patnaik, for the petitioners  in petns.
numbers 167 of 58 and 4 of 59 .
n. c. chatterjee and r. patnaik, for the petitioner  in petn.
number 168 of 1958 .
c. k. daphtary, solicitor-general of india, b. r. l. iyengar and t. m. sen, for the respondents.
1961.
october 16.
the judgment of sinha, c. j., das and ayyangar, jj., was delivered by sinha, c.j., and the judgment of sarkar and mudholkar, jj., was delivered by mudholkar, j. sinha, c. j.-the petitioners in these writ petitions, under art.
32 of the constitution, complain of interference with their rights under the several khor posh grants, and pray for writs of certiorari or mandamus and further orders or directions to the respondents for the enforcement of their alleged rights.
in writ petition number 79 of 1957, the first respondent is the state of orissa, and the union of india is the second respondent.
in all the other writ petitions, the state of orissa is the sole respondent.
as most of the questions of law relating to the interpretation of the constitution, or other laws hereinafter to be referred to, are common, the cases have been heard together.
but in order to appreciate the points arising in these cases, it is necessary to state the facts of each case separately.
i. writ petition number 79 of 1957.
in writ petition 79 of 1957, the petitioner is the younger brother of the present raja of talcher, which was an independent sovereign state before its merger.
it was later incorporated in the state of orissa.
the talcher state was a sovereign state of the rajabahadur of talcher, under the paramountcy of the british government, before india attained independence.
as such a sovereign, the rajah had absolute powers of disposal of the properties comprised in the state.
the succession to the rulership of the state is governed by the mitakshara law, according to the rule of lineal primogeniture.
the petitioner is a citizen of india and is the only younger brother of the present raja of talcher.
the petitioners father, the previous ruler of talcher, died in 1945 and was succeeded by the petitioners elder brother, the present raja of talcher.
according to immemorial and long established custom of the state, as also according to the hindu law of lineal primogeniture, the junior members of the family of the rulers, for the time being, were entitled to and were provided with suitable maintenance, either land or in money, to enable them to maintain themselves in accordance with their status as members of the rulers family.
the grants of land, or its equivalent in money, or partly in land and partly in money, used to be called khanja or khor posh grants, and the grantees were known as khanjadars or khorposhdars.
the nature and conditions of such grants have been laid down in order 31 of the rules, regulations and privileges of khanjadars and khorposhdars.
those rules, regulations of talcher etc.  1937  state the law of the state.
in accordance with the law aforesaid, the khorposh grants made by the ruler, for the time being, became the absolute private property of the grantee, being a male or a female member of the family of the grantor.
the petitioner was born in 1903, and in the same year the petitioners father, who was then ruler of the state of talcher, made a grant in perpetuity to the petitioner of 5 villages specified in the schedule to the petition.
the said grant conveyed to the petitioner full proprietary rights in the villages aforesaid.
by an order, dated march 31, 1912, the ruler aforesaid passed an order to the effect that the income of the 5 villages granted to the petitioner, as aforesaid, be collected by the state officials and deposited in the state treasury, and the petitioner should be paid in cash the equivalent of the income from the villages aforesaid, amounting to rs. 5926 odd.
by a subsequent order, dated september 8, 1929, the ruler aforesaid directed the settlement officer, who was in charge of making the records up to date, to keep the aforesaid grant yielding a cash income of rs. 5926 odd intact, to be enjoyed by the petitioner in perpetuity under hereditary rights.
the ruler of the state, after making the necessary enquiries, directed, by his order dated march 16, 1944, that the petitioner should be paid rs. 6200 a year, as a cash allowance out of the state treasury in lieu of the income from the villages granted to the petitioner, as aforesaid.
since then the petitioner was being paid regularly the allowance at the rate of rs. 500 per month, till april 1949.
going a little backwards, it is necessary to complete the narrative of events by stating that in august 1947, the present raja of talcher, the petitioners elder brother, entered into an agreement with the dominion of india after its formation after the independence act of 1947, and executed an instrument of accession, which was in the form as it appears in appendix viii at page 169 of the white paper on indian states.
another agreement, in form appearing in appendix ix at page 173 of the white paper, was also entered into between the ruler of talcher and the dominion of india.
on december 14, 1947, an agreement, called the merger agreement, in the same form as appendix xi at page 178 of the white paper, was entered into between the governor- general of india and the raja of talcher.
the terms and effect of these transactions will have to be examined in detail later.
on january 1, 1948, the state of talcher merged in the dominion of india in accordance with the merger agreement aforesaid.
the petitioner claims that the khorposh grant made to him, as aforesaid, was fully and unequivocally recognized by the state and that even without such recognition his rights before the merger of the state of talcher in orissa remained intact, and neither the central government nor the state government could question or ignore those rights.
as the petitioner did not receive his khorposh allowance due for the month of april, 1949 he entered into correspondence with the government of orissa.
in answer he received a latter, dated may 26, 1949, from the sub- divisional magistrate of talcher informing him that the payment of allowance in question could not be made until further instructions were received from the government.
as a result of further correspondent between the petitioner and the government of orissa, the petitioner received a letter, on june 22, 1949, to the following effect with reference to your letter number nil dated 7th june, 1949, on the subject mentioned above, i am directed to say that as you have extensive landed property and are well off in life, government of india have not allowed any monthly cash allowance.
the decision of the government of india is final in this matter and cannot be reconsidered.
it is this order of the government which the petitioner challenges as invalid and interfering with his property rights.
after entering into further correspondence with the government of india, the petitioner received on september 7, 1956, a copy of the letter dated march 26, 1955, to the following effect the government of india are advised that the alleged grant of maintenance allowance to you by the ruler of talcher was never recognized by the govt.
of india or the state govt.
of orissa.
after the merger therefore no claim for payment of the said allowance can be enforced against either the state govt.
of orissa or the central govt.
the govt.
of india are further advised that even if, according to the law applicable to the members of the ruling family of talcher you had a right to be maintained, that was rights against the ruler of talcher which is not legally enforceable against either the govt.
of orissa or the central govt.
who have not inherited or undertaken any obligation in the behalf.
as regards your contention based on the provisions of articles 2 and 4 of the merger agreement signed by the ruler of talcher, i am directed to say that the govt.
of india do not consider that these have the effect of placing an obligation on the government to continue your allowance.
the correctness and validity of the statements of fact and law contained in the letter aforesaid of the government of india is challenged by this petition on the grounds that governments order aforesaid amount to an infringement of the petitioners fundamental rights under arts.
19 1  f  and 31 of the constitution and are also discriminatory, thus violating art.
14 of the constitution inasmuch as the other khorposh grantees have been allowed to continue enjoying their similar rights.
it was on these allegations that the petitioner moved this court and obtained the rule.
ii. writ petition number 167 of 1958.
the petitioner in this case is the younger brother of the raja of what was previously known as the state of bamra, one of the native states in orissa.
the ruler of bamra possessed and exercised absolute rights-legislative, executive and judicial-in his territory, subject to the paramountcy of the british government.
the ruler of bamra also, like the other ruler similarly situated, acceded to the dominion of india by an instrument of accession executed between him and the governor-general of india on or about the 15th of august, 1947, in terms similar to the form appearing in appendix vii of the white papers, at page 165.
there are similar allegations, as in the previous case, about the law and custom governing the grant of khorposh to the members of the ruling family.
in accordance with the law aforesaid and in exercise of his sovereign powers, the ruler made the following 4 grants in favour of the petitioner.
1. land revenue hereditary grant of rs. 10,000 per annum out of the revenue income of the village balanda and 24 others in bamra state granted by the ruler on 24-3-47. 2. land revenue hereditary kharposh mafi grant of rs. 2,400 per year out of the income of village nenei and 6 others granted by the ruler on 15-9-45.
3. forest grant of panguli and prabhasuni reserve forests for reclaiming 1500 acres granted by ruler on 27th december, 1947.
4. tank at deogarh granted by ruler on 22-9-47.
all these properties have been duly recorded in revenue registers.
after the grants aforesaid had been made in favour of the petitioner, who is the only surviving younger brother of the ruler, the latter executed, on the december 30,1947, the agreement of merger by which he transferred to the dominion government authority, jurisdiction and power for and in relation to the governance of bamra state and also agreed to transfer the administration of the state on january 1, 1948.
on june 8, 1949, the government of orissa, purporting to act in exercise of its powers under s. 4 of the extra provincial jurisdiction act  xlvii of 1947 , read with notification dated march 23, 1948, issued directions to the effect that the commitments, specified in the schedule to the notification, made by the ruler of bamra were not reasonable and bonafide in the opinion of the provincial government and were declared null and void and not binding on them, and shall stand annulled as from the date of the said commitments and that no court shall have jurisdiction to call into question the validity of the order.
the schedule to the notification aforesaid also made reference to the grants made in favour of the petitioner.
then the petition goes to make allegations as to why the petitioner was discriminated against on grounds of political bias.
the petitioner also challenged the authority of the government of orissa, or of central government, to annul the said grants, and characterised the annulment as wholly void.
as the petitioners memorial and petition requesting the orissa government to annual their order of june 8, 1949, aforesaid had proved unavailing, as would appear from the governments letter dated june 26, 1957, the petitioner had no option left but to move this court.
the orders aforesaid of the government are challenged as null and void and ultra vires the powers of the government, as violative of arts.
19 and 31 of the constitution.
iii. writ petition 168 of 1958.
the petitioner in this case is the same as the petitioner in the writ petition 167 of 1958.
after making allegations similar to those in the previous petition, he goes on to state that the ruler of the bamra state made the following order on december 8, 1947.
bamra darbar order as my brother barakumar pratap ganga deb is going to marry soon and as the present maintenance grant will be insufficient to maintain himself and his family befitting his status and position, the present maintenance grant of rs. 600 p. m. is increased to rs. 1000  one thousand  per month with effect from the 1st of december 1947.
8th dec., 1947.
sd-b.c. tribhuban deb.
raja ruler, bamra state.
the petitioner goes on to state that, not withstanding the protest of the petitioner, the increased amount of maintenance at rs. 1000 per month, as granted by the ruler, as aforesaid, was reduced by mr. d. v. rege, the adviser to the orissa state, by his letter dated june 11, 1949 to the following effect- dear bara kumar sahib, with the approval of government of india your allowance has been increased from rs. 7200 to rs. 9600 per annum from 1-4- 1948.
your sincerely, sd.
d. v. rege this reduced amount of maintenance at the rate of rs. 800 per month continued be to paid to the petitioner from april 1, 1948 till july 1, 1957.
but after the passing of the budget for 1957-58, during the discussion on the orissa appropriation bill  ii of 1957  on june 29, 1957, the then chief minister of orissa, dr. hare krishna mahtab, suddenly, for political reasons, made a statement in the assembly to the following effect government have decided that on principles and on grounds of expediency all allowances to relatives of the rulers should be annulled with effect from 1st july, 1957, and the fact should be communicated to the government of india, subject to the following conditions-  1  the existing allowances should be continued in respect of widowed rajmatas and other widows subject to a maximum limit of rs. 500 per month.   2  if, as a result of annulment of these allowances, any hardship is caused to anybody, he or she may represent to government for consideration of his or her case and government after proper enquiry about the actual conditions and income of the representationist and after being satisfied about the genuineness of the grievance, may, in suitable cases, grant allowances to anybody upto a maximum limit of rs. 500 p.m. the result of this statement was that the petitioners allowance was annulled.
the petitioners memorials and petitions to the state government and to the central government authorities proved fruitless hence the writ petition in respect of the annulment aforesaid.
iv.
writ petition number 4 of 1959.
the petitioners in this case are the mother and younger brother of the present maharaja of the state of kalahandi, previously known as the state of kalahandi, one of the native states in orissa.
after the death of the late maharaja braja mohan deo of kalahandi in 1939 at the age of 43, the maintenance allowance of rs. 1200 per month was fixed for the first petitioner by the political department of the government of india.
she continued to get the allowance even after the merger of the state of kalahandi with the province of orissa.
the petitioner number 2, as the younger brother of the ruler of kalahandi and in accordance with the law and custom prevailing in that area, was granted by the then ruler, his brother, h.h. maharaja p. k. deo a maintenance allowance of rs. 1200 per month.
after the merger of the state in the state of orissa and on the recommendation of shri rege i.c.s., a maintenance allowance of rs. 1000 per month was fixed for the petitioner in consultation with the government of india.
as a result of the statement made by the then chief minister of orissa, dated june 28,1957, quoted above, the petitioners have been deprived of their just claims to maintenance in accordance with the law.
the petitioners memorials to the state government and to the authorities of the central government have produced no results hence the writ petition against the stopping of the payment of allowances to the petitioners with effect from july 1, 1957.
in support of these petitions, three separate arguments have been addressed to us, and have covered a very wide field.
shri viswanatha sastri appeared in support of petition number 79 of 1957 shri purshottam trikamdass appeared in support of petition number 167 of 1958 and number 4 of 1959, and shri n. c. chatterjee appeared in support of the petition number 168 of 1958.
though the arguments have been overlapping and not always consistent, the points urged on behalf of the petitioners in each case may be summarised as follows.
the grants made by the rulers in each case were in respect of the khorposh rights of the members of their family, which the rulers, under the law both statutory and customary, recongnised as the rights of the junior members of the family which is governed by the rule of lineal primogeniture.
generally the grants took the shape of landed property but very often the usufruct of the property was taken over by the state in lieu of a cash allowance.
whether the khorposh grant took the form of land or of money, it was made by a sovereign ruler.
every act of the ruler, whether executive, legislative or judicial in character, with reference to modern democratic ideas of separation of power, has the force of law.
in the hands of the ruler for the time being, these distinctions did not hold good.
whatever they said or did in relation to the affairs of the state was law for the time being, which the ruler could abrogate or modify according to his absolute power.
but after the disappearance of the rulers sovereign powers, the succeeding power, whether it was the government of india or the province, and later the state of orissa, was not competent to abrogate the orders granting maintenance to the junior members of the family, according to the law of the land, without recourse to legislation by a competent body.
in this connection reliance was placed on the decisions in the case of director of endowments, government of hyderabad v. akram ali and madhaorao phalke v. the state of madhya bharat.
hence the government of india had to get the parliament to make the necessary legislation, if it intended to do away with the rights to khorposh created by the previous rulers of the states concerned.
it was also contended that there was no entry either in list i or in list iii, of the constitution, which could authorise the central legislature to make a law abrogating those grants.
it was further contended that in respect of some of the grants at least, the government of india had recognised the rights of the grantees and had been making payments through the state of orissa, in pursuance of those recognised rights.
in the case of the petitioners in writ petition 168 of 1958 and 4 of 1959, it was further argued that the payments had been made to the grantees until june 1957.
it was only in july, 1957, that the payments were stopped arbitrarily as a result of the statement made by the chief minister of orissa, as stated above.
the learned solicitor general, who appeared on behalf of the respondents, first raised a preliminary objection in respect of the first case  writ petition 79 of 1957  relating to the grant by the ruler of talcher.
his contention was that it was the admitted case of the parties that the payment to the petitioner was stopped in april, 1949, and the petitioner was informed by the governments order dated june 22, 1949 that the governments decision to stop the payment was final and could not be reconsidered.
that being so, the rights guaranteed by the constitution could not be founded upon, in respect of a cause of action which arose before the constitution could not be founded upon, in respect of a cause of action which arose before the constitution.
in the second case, namely writ petition 167 of 1958, the right, if any, has been abrogated by the governments notification dated june 8, 1949, hence in this case also the preliminary objection, if it has any force, applies.
the other arguments, of the solicitor general, which apply to all the cases, were to the effect that the grant, if any, was not grant of land but of money, any, therefore, was not grant of land but of money, and, therefore, was not a grant properly so called that there may have been a law relating to the making of khorposh grants to junior members of the family of the rulers governed by the rule of lineal primogeniture, but the act of making each individual grant could not properly be characterised, as enacting a law it could, at best, be an order in exercise of the powers of the ruler giving effect to the law in question.
alternatively, it was argued that whether or not the making of a grant was enacting a law, and whatever its nature, it could be abrogated by the succeeding sovereign power, without recourse to legislation.
it was further argued that the matter in controversy would be governed by the provisions of the extra provincial jurisdiction act  xlvii of 1947 , which came into effect on december 24,1947.
reliance was placed upon s. 3 of the act which lays down that it shall be lawful for the central government to exercise extra provincial jurisdiction in such manner as it thinks fit.
it was pointed out that under sub. s. 2  of s. 3 of the act, the central government had been authorised to delegate its jurisdiction, and this power the government exercised in favour of the provincial government of orissa, the terms of s. 4 1  to the effect that the central government may make such order as may seem to it expedient for the effective exercise of its jurisdiction under the act, were also relied upon as the source of the authority for cancelling the khorposh allowance in favour of the petitioners made by the ex-rulers.
it was further contended that s. 5 of the act validated the impugned orders of the government, and whether or not they were legal, thay shall be valid as if they had been done according to the local law then in force in that area.
and lastly, it was urged that, in any view of the matter, the orders impugned by the petitioners in these cases were acts of state, the legality of which could not be canvassed in a municipal court.
before dealing with the arguments on the merits of the controversy, it is convenient first to deal with the preliminary objection raised with reference to the first two petitions, on behalf of the respondents, to the effect that the orders passed before the coming into effect of the constitution could not be challenged in a writ petition because no writ could be issued in respect of orders passed before the constitution came into force.
if the grants were in the shape of land, and if the government had deprived the petitioners of those lands, it could have been argued with a good deal of force that the dispossession from the lands took place at a time when the constitution was not in force.
but it appears that in these cases the grants ultimately assumed the shape of money allowances payable at regular intervals.
they were to be paid periodically.
hence, every periodic deprivation of the money allowance would give the petitioners a right to approach this court for relief.
it appears from the pleadings of the parties that the petitioners entered into prolonged correspondence insisting upon their rights under the grants by the former rulers and trying to impress upon the government the justness of their demands.
it was only in 1957 that the petitioners realised that they had no hopes of any revision by the government of the policy which they had adopted of cancelling those grants.
in our opinion, therefore, the preliminary objection has to be overruled.
in order to determine the controversy on its merits, it is necessary to trace the history of the relationship between the rulers and the government of india before the territories concerned became a part of the territory of india.
during the british regime, the rulers of the indian states  then called native states  enjoyed certain amount of sovereign powers, which were not uniform.
the extent of their sovereignty under the suzerainty or the paramount authority of the british government depended upon the several agreements between them.
the position is thus described in the white paper on indian states  page 32, para 71  till the lapse of paramountcy, the crown as represented by and operating through the political authorities provided the nexus between the indian states and the central and provincial governments.
the pivot of this arrangement was the viceroy, who as crown representative represented to the indian states the suzerainty of the british crown while at the same time he was, in relation to british india, the head of the government as governor-general.
the indian independence act, 1947, released the states from all their obligations to the crown.
after the coming into effect of the indian independence act and the establishment of the indian dominion, as a result of negotiation between the dominion of india and the indian states, certain steps were taken towards the integration of those states with india.
the first step was the accession of these states in accordance with the instruments of accession, which appear in appendices vii and viii at pages 165 to 173 of the white paper.
as a result of the accession, the three states with which we are now concerned-the states of talcher, bamra and kalahandi-acceded to the dominion of india with the intent that the governor-general of india the dominion, legislature, the federal court and any other dominion authority established for the purposes of the dominion shall, by virtue of this instrument of accession but subject always to the terms thereof, and for the purposes only of the dominion, exercise in relation to the states such functions as may be vested in them by or under the government of india act, 1935, as in force in the dominion of india on the 15th day of august, 1947.
this accession did not affect the continuance of the sovereignty of the rulers entering into the agreement, save as provided by or under the instrument of accession.
it, however, provided that in respect of such matters as are specified in the schedule annexed to the instrument, which may be compendiously described as defence, external affairs and communications, the dominion legislature may make laws which shall apply to the acceding states also.
it is not necessary to notice the difference between the instrument of accession as contained in appendix vii and that contained in appendix viii for the purposes of these cases.
the second step was the signing of what has been termed standstill agreement, the form of which appears in appendix ix at pages 173-74 of the white paper.
the acceding states signed this standstill agreement which provided for the continuance for the time being of all subsisting agreements and administrative arrangements in matters of common concern between the states and the dominion of india.
the first phase of the process of integration of the indian states into the indian dominion was the accession of the states as aforesaid.
the second phase followed on the merger of these states into the dominion of india as a result of the merger agreement, in terms appearing in appendix xi at pages 178-179 of the white paper.
in december 1947, these states merged with the dominion of india by virtue of the agreements of merger, whereby the states ceded to the dominion government full and ex