--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal numbers 354-355 of 2015  special leave petition  c  numbers7939-7940 of 2004  assitant commissioner, ernakulam petitioner s  versus hindustan urban infrastructure limited and ors.
respondent s  j u d g m e n t h.l. dattu, cji.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

1. leave granted.
2. the issue that arises for our consideration and decision in the present appeals is whether an official liquidator is a dealer within the meaning of section 2  viii  of the kerala general sales tax act, 1963  for short, the act, 1963 , and therefore would be required to collect sales tax in respect of the sales effected by him pursuant to winding up proceedings of a company in liquidation.
3. these appeals are directed against the judgment s  and order s  passed by the high court of kerala in m.f.a.
number1394 of 2002, dated 11.02.2003, and in review petition number191 of 2003, dated 21.03.2003.
the division bench of the high court in review confirmed the finding in m.f.a.
number1394 of 2002 and concluded that the official liquidator is not a dealer under the act, 1963.
however, by the impugned judgment, the high court has set aside the finding of the learned single judge which held that the machinery purchased in the auction sale conducted by the official liquidator is not be liable to be taxed under the act, 1963.
the impugned judgment has further accepted a fresh plea raised by the appellant that the auction purchaser would be liable to pay purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.
4. it is relevant to state that respondent number1, that is, hindustan urban infrastructure limited, had filed a separate appeal- civil appeal number5048 of 2003 against the specific finding of the high court in the impugned judgment with regard to the liability to pay purchase tax which was imposed upon the auction purchaser thereunder.
this court has separately dealt with the aforesaid question by its order dated 04.09.2014 in the said civil appeal.
facts- 5. to appreciate the issues involved, it would be necessary to notice the facts leading up to the present appeals.
m s. premier cable company limited  for short, the company , was registered under the companies act, 1956  for short, the act, 1956 , and engaged in the manufacturing of pvc power cables, aluminium conductors, enameled wires, etc. pursuant to a recommendation by the board for industrial and financial reconstruction,  for short, bifr , the company was ordered to be wound up by an order passed by the high court in c.p. number2 of 1996, dated 18.06.1998. respondent number2, that is, the official liquidator attached to the high court was appointed to take charge of the assets and liabilities of the company and to deal with the same in accordance with the provisions of the act, 1956 and the rules framed thereunder.
6. pursuant to the aforesaid order, the official liquidator issued a notice inviting tenders, in respect of the sale of assets of the company in liquidation, dated 26.11.2001.
the aforesaid assets included land with factory building, workshop building, canteen building, godowns, quarters and other auxiliary buildings and also plant and machinery of the company in liquidation.
the terms and conditions of the sale of the assets of the company expressly provided, inter alia, that such sale would be subject to confirmation by the high court and further subject to any subsequent terms and conditions as may be imposed by the high court.
7. respondent number1-auction purchaser, in response to the notice inviting tenders issued by the official liquidator, offered to purchase lot numbers1-2 for a total amount of rs.5,76,00,000/-  rupees five crore seventy six lakh only , by an offer letter dated 18.12.2001.
it was expressly stated therein that the said amount would be inclusive of all statutory levies such as sales tax, central sales tax, excise duty, etc., if any, as may be applicable.
after accepting the offer so made, the official liquidator had placed the same before the learned judge dealing with the company matters for its confirmation.
8. subsequent to the confirmation of the said sale, the auction purchaser, being desirous to transport the purchased assets across the border of multiple states, had requested the official liquidator to incorporate the relevant sales tax registration numbers in the sale invoices, vide letter dated 29.08.2002.
by letter dated 03.09.2002, the official liquidator had declined to accede to the request so made.
9. subsequently, the official liquidator filed an affidavit before the learned single judge of the high court, inter alia, stating that the official liquidator would neither be collecting nor be paying any cess or sales tax in respect of the sale effected by the respondent number2.
it was stated that, in the opinion of the official liquidator, the auction purchaser should be directed by the high court to meet any expenses or liability towards payment of cess, sales tax, etc., if and when the same becomes payable.
10.
an application was also filed by the official liquidator, in the company petition before the learned singe judge, inter alia, seeking clarification on certain aspects of the matter including whether the auction purchaser would be liable to pay tax on the purchase of goods, pursuant to the auction conducted and further to direct the auction purchaser to pay any tax as may be leviable by the sales tax department.
the learned single judge after considering the prayers made in the application has passed an order, in c.a. number293 of 2002 and c.a. number333 of 2002 in c.p. number2 of 1996, dated 30.10.2002, wherein it was held that the sale in question cannot be treated as a sale by the central government or by a registered dealer entitled to collect tax and further has observed that the auction purchaser cannot be treated as a dealer under the act, 1963 and further that the said sale in question would not be exigible to sales tax.
11.
the appellant, aggrieved by the order of the learned single judge, filed an appeal against the order dated 30.10.2002, inter alia, contending that the official liquidator would be bound to pay sales tax as and when a sale of the assets of the company in liquidation would be effected by him.
the division bench of the high court by an order passed in m.f.a.
number1394 of 2002, observed that the official liquidator would not fall within the definition of dealer under the act, 1963, dated 11.02.2003.
accordingly the appeal was dismissed and the order of the learned single judge was confirmed.
12. aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 11.02.2003, the appellant filed review petition number191 of 2003 before the high court.
in the review petition, a new plea was advanced by the appellant claiming that even if the official liquidator did not fall within the definition of dealer under the act, 1963, section 5a of the said act would be attracted insofar as the auction purchaser is concerned.
13.
by the impugned judgment s  and order s  passed in review petition number191 of 2003, dated 21.03.2003, the high court held that the official liquidator cannot be treated as a dealer under the act, 1963, and therefore it is not exigible for payment of sales tax.
however, the court was of the view that the auction purchaser is liable to pay purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.
issues- 14.
the issues that arise for the consideration in the present appeals are firstly, whether the official liquidator is a dealer within the meaning of the act, 1963, and secondly, whether the official liquidator would be required to pay sales tax in respect of sales effected pursuant to a winding up proceedings.
submissions- 15.
shri v. giri, learned counsel for the appellant, submits that the consistent stand taken by the revenue, is that the official liquidator is liable to pay sales tax on the transaction in question.
he would state that the official liquidator was held to be a dealer under the act, 1963 by the learned single judge as well as by the division bench of the high court, and that it is only in review that the said finding was reversed.
to support the decision of the learned single judge and the division bench of the high court, he would rely upon the definition of dealer as provided under the act, 1963 and submit that the official liquidator is an agent of the central government and therefore would deemed to be a dealer as provided under explanation 2 to section 2 viii  f  of the act, 1963.
to further substantiate his contention, he would refer to the statement filed, by the special government pleader  taxes , appearing for the sales tax authorities, before the learned single judge of the high court, wherein it was categorically stated that the official liquidator would be liable to pay tax at the relevant rate under the act, 1963, whether or not he had collected the same from the auction purchaser.
16.
shri c.s. rajan, learned counsel for the official liquidator- respondent number2, would support the findings of the high court in the review petition and state that the official liquidator would not be liable to pay any tax under the act, 1963.
he would further state that the liability would in fact be on the auction purchaser who would be exigible to purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.
17.
shri rajan would then elaborate upon the nature of the activities carried on by the official liquidator and submit that since an official liquidator is an officer of the court, he merely discharges statutory functions imposed upon him and therefore cannot be held liable to pay tax under the act, 1963.
to support this submission, he would further refer to various provisions of the act, 1956 and the companies  court  rules, 1959  for short, the rules, 1959 .
shri rajan would lastly submit that since the official liquidator discharges statutory functions of selling the assets of the company in liquidation, he cannot be perceived to be carrying on business as defined under the act, 1963 and thus cannot be exigible to tax.
18.
shri s.k. bagaria, learned senior counsel for the auction purchaser would submit that the question of payment of purchase tax could not arise because firstly, the contention was raised for the first time in the review petition, and secondly, the said tax is a single-point levy at the first point of sale.
he would contend that the auction purchaser could not be made liable for a tax that was not even imposed or demanded by the competent authority.
he would then contend that the official liquidator makes the sale on behalf of the company and not as the owner.
lastly, shri bagaria would refer to rule 54 of the kerala general sales tax rules, 1963  for short, the rules, 1963  and section 17 of the central sales tax act, 1956  for short, the cst act  to demonstrate that the liability to pay sales tax was clearly on the official liquidator.
19.
we have heard the learned counsel for the parties to the lis and also carefully perused the orders passed by the courts and the forums below.
20.
the point for the consideration and decision of this court is whether the official liquidator is a dealer within the meaning of the act, 1963, and whether or not he would be required to pay sales tax in respect of sales effected by him pursuant to winding up proceedings.
relevant provisions- 21.
to appreciate the arguments canvassed it is relevant to notice the relevant provisions.
they are- sections 448, 456, 457 of the act, 1956 rules 232, 233 of the rules, 1959 sections 2  vi , 2  viii , 5, 5a, 22 of the act, 1963 and rule 54 of the rules, 1963.
since these provisions have been amended from time to time, we have considered the provisions as they were in statute book during the relevant period.
22.
sections 448, 456, 457 of the act, 1956 deal with the appointment and powers of the official liquidator.
section 448 of the act, 1956 provides for the appointment of an official liquidator for the purpose of winding up of a company.
the official liquidator so appointed conducts the proceedings in the winding up of the company and performs other duties, as the court imposes upon him, in consonance with the provisions of the act, 1956.
section 456 of the act, 1956 states that pursuant to a winding up order, the liquidator shall take into his custody or under his control, all the properties, effects and actionable claims to which the company is or appears to be entitled to.
by the said provision, all the properties and effects of the company are deemed to be in the custody of the court, from the date of the winding up order.
section 457 of the act, 1956 lists the powers of the official liquidator.
the powers include, inter alia, to carry on business of the company for its beneficial winding up, to sell the immovable and movable property and actionable claims of the company, by public auction or private contract, and to do all things as may be necessary for winding up the affairs of the company and distribution of its assets.
however, the powers conferred by virtue of the section 457 of the act, 1956, on the liquidator, are subject to the control of the court.
23. in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections  1  and  2  of section 643 of the act, 1956, the rules, 1959 were enacted.
the relevant rules regarding the collection and distribution of assets in a winding-up by court are found under rules 232 to 234 of the rules, 1959.
rule 232 deals with the powers of the official liquidator.
as per the rule, the duties imposed on the court under section 467 1  of the act, 1956 concerning the collection of the assets of the company and the application of the assets in discharge of the companys liabilities must be discharged by the official liquidator as an officer of the court.
the discharge of the aforesaid functions would be subject to the control of the court and to the proviso in section 643 2  of the act, 1956.
rule 233 states that in discharge of the duties imposed upon the official liquidator, pursuant to section 467 1  of the act, 1956, and for the purpose of acquiring and retaining possession of the property of the company, he must be treated as a receiver of the property appointed by the court.
24. section 2 of the act, 1963 provides for the meaning of certain expressions in the said act.
section 2 vi  defines business as follows  vi  business includes -  a  any trade, commerce or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce, or manufacture, whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on with a motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any profit accrues from such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern and  b  any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary to such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern 25.
section 2 viii  of the act, 1963 deals with the definition of the term dealer as under  viii  dealer means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, executing works contract, transferring the right to use any goods or supplying by way of or as part of any service, any goods directly or otherwise, whether for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration and includes, -  a  omitted  b  a casual trader  c  x x x x  d   x x x x  e  x x x x  f  a person who whether in the course of business or not  1  transfers any goods, including controlled goods whether in pursuance of a contract or not, for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration  2  transfers property in goods  whether as goods or in some other form  involved in the execution of a works contract  3  delivers any goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by installments  4  transfers the right to use any goods for any purpose  whether or not for a specified period  for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration  5  supplies, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, goods, being food or any other articles for human consumption or any drink  whether or not intoxicating , where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration explanation-  1  a society including a co-operative society, club or firm or an association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not  which whether or not in the course of business, buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods from or to its members for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this act explanation -  2  the central government or a state government, which whether or not in the course of business, buy, sell, supply or distribute goods, directly or otherwise, for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this act.   g  a bank or a financing institution, which, whether in the course of its business or not, sells any gold or other valuable article pledged with it to secure any loan, for the realisation of such loan amount.
explanation i - bank for the purposes of this clause includes a nationalized bank or a schedule bank or a co-operative bank explanation ii - financing institution means a financing institution other than a bank 26.
on perusal of the aforementioned definitions, it would appear that the term business has been given a broad meaning by including within its ambit both incidental and ancillary transactions.
further, it has also eliminated the requirement of a profit motive as being an essential component.
the definition of dealer has also been given a wide ambit.
it includes any person carrying on business of, inter alia, buying, selling, supply or distribution of goods, whether directly or otherwise.
all modes of payment whether by way of cash, commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration have been included therein.
it also includes, inter alia, a casual trader, a non-resident dealer, a commission agent, a broker, an auctioneer and other mercantile agents.
sub-section  f  of the definition further expands the scope of the provision by including within its ambit, an array of transactions, which may or may not be in the course of business.
section 2 viii  f  1  expressly includes, within the definition of a dealer, a person who whether in the course of business or not transfers any goods, whether in the pursuance of a contract or not, for cash or deferred payment.
27. section 5 of the act, 1963 is the charging provision under the said act and provides for the levy of tax on the sale and purchase of goods.
it provides that every dealer, whose total turnover for that year is not less than rs.2,00,000/-, would be liable to pay tax as per rates and at points as specified in the schedules to the act, 1963.
the first schedule to the act, 1963 would be relevant for the purpose of the present appeal.
serial number84 of the said schedule deals with, inter alia, machinery and it provides that the point of levy shall be at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 of the act, 1963.
28. section 5a of the act, 1963 is the charging provision as regard to the imposition of purchase tax.
under the said provision, the purchaser of any goods which may be consumed, used, disposed or dispatched to any place outside the state from a registered dealer will incur liability for payment of purchase tax.
the provision amply clarifies that purchase tax would be applicable only in circumstances in which no tax is payable under sub-sections  1 ,  3 ,  4  or  5  of section 5 of the act, 1963.
29.
the rules, 1963, have been enacted in exercise of the powers conferred by section 57 of the act, 1963.
rule 54 of the rules, 1963, reads as follows 54.
liability of court of wards, official trustee etc.- in the case of business, owned by a dealer whose estate or any portion of whose estate is under the control of court of wards, the administrator general, the official trustee or any receiver or manager  including any person whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business on behalf of the dealer  appointed by, or, under any order of a court, the tax shall be levied upon and recoverable from such court of wards, administrator general, official trustee, receiver or manager in like manner and on the same terms as it would be leviable upon and recoverable from the dealer if he were conducting the business himself, and all the provisions of the act and rules made there under shall apply accordingly.
30.
the aforementioned rule contemplates a scenario wherein a business, owned by a dealer, is under the control of, inter alia, the official trustee or receiver or manager, including any other person who manages the business of the said dealer, who is appointed by an order of a court.
in such an event, tax would be recoverable from such a person who controls the business of the dealer in the same or like manner, as would have been recoverable from the dealer itself.
discussion- 31.
at the outset, it would be necessary to make reference to the statement affidavit filed by the special government pleader  taxes , appearing for the revenue, before the learned single judge of the high court.
in the said statement affidavit, the revenue has stated that a sale by the official liquidator, whether by auction or otherwise, is a sale by the central government and therefore the official liquidator becomes a dealer under the act, 1963.
it was further stated that although tax may be collected only by a registered dealer, the central government is empowered to collect tax in the manner a registered dealer is entitled to.
the revenue, in its conclusion therein, has stated that the official liquidator would be liable to pay tax at the relevant rate, whether he had collected the same or not.
32.
to appreciate the stand of the revenue, it would be profitable to refer to section 2 viii  of the act, 1963 which defines the expression dealer as any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, executing works contract, transferring right to use any goods or supplying by way of or as part of any service, any goods directly or indirectly.
the aforementioned activities are carried out for the payment of consideration, in the form of cash, deferred payment, commission, remuneration, etc. thus, the emphasis under this clause of carrying on business is to be understood in a wide sense and not merely restricted to the activity of buying and selling.
33.
the expression business has been given a wide and inclusive definition, whereby any business, trade, commerce or manufacture or any activity of the said nature, whether or not it is carried on with a motive for profit has been expressly included.
it further includes any transaction in connection with such trade, commerce, etc. including within its purview, all ancillary or incidental activities in connection with any trade, commerce, etc. 34.
section 2 viii  f  further expands the definition of dealer enabling a far wider class of persons to fall within its ambit.
it includes any person who transfers any goods, transfers property in goods involved in the execution of a works contract, delivers any goods on hire purchase or any system of payment by installments, transfers the right to use any goods for any purpose and lastly, any food or beverage supplier or service provider, fit for human consumption.
the explanation 1 to sub-clause  f  includes a society, club, firm or an association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
explanation 2 includes the central government, state government and any of its apparatus within the scope of this section.
35.
therefore, given the exceptionally wide scope of the definition, prima facie, it can be concluded that any person or entity that carries on any activity of selling goods, could be categorized as a dealer under the act, 1963.
to test the aforesaid conclusion in the context of the issue at hand, we would delve into the interpretation ascribed by this court to the term dealer.
a careful reading of the definition of dealer under the act, 1963, would make it evident that the legislature intended to provide for an inclusive criterion and broaden the ambit of the said classification.
the legislature did not propose to restrict the scope of the term as perceived in common parlance.
36.
the definition of a dealer under various sales tax legislations has been given a wide import by several decisions of this court.
in chowringhee sales bureau  p  limited v. cit,  1973  1 scc 46, inter alia, a challenge was made to the explanation to the definition of dealer under the bengal finance  sales tax  act, 1941 on the ground that is sought to levy a tax on a person who is neither a seller nor a purchaser.
a three- judge bench of this court, rejecting the said challenge, held that the term dealer would include an auctioneer who carries on the business of selling and who has in the customary course of business authority to sell goods belonging to the principal.
it was further observed that the given explanation sought to tax a transaction of sale of goods.
it was held that, a statutory provision providing for a levy of sales tax on a person such as an auctioneer, would be permissible, if there is a close and direct connection between the transaction of sale and the person made liable for the payment of sales tax.
37.
in state of u.p. v. union of india,  2003  3 scc 239, this court held that the central government, when involved in the business of buying and selling, could be treated as a dealer under the u.p. sales tax act, 1940.
the court observed as follows 11.
it is thus clear that in regard to a transfer of the right to use any goods both a person and a government will be within the ambit of the definition of dealer subject to the following distinction a person to be a dealer should carry on the business of buying, selling etc., whether regularly or otherwise, but a government which buys, sells etc.  whether in the course of business or otherwise  will be a dealer for purposes of the u.p. act.
inasmuch as the definition of sale includes any transfer of property in the goods and a transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose, dot which engages in transfer of right to use any goods will be a dealer within the meaning of sub-clause  iv  of clause  c  of section 2 of the u.p. act.
38.
in state of t.n. v. shakti estates,  1989  1 scc 636, this court while ascertaining whether the assessee could be treated as a dealer gave a wide import to the term under the tamil nadu general sales tax act, 1959.
the court observed as follows 10.
moreover, we have also to give full effect to the definitions in the statute we are concerned with.
the definition of a business also includes any transaction in connection with or incidental to or ancillary to a trade and thus, even on the assessees own arguments, these activities were incidental and ancillary to the business which the assessee was carrying on or definitely intended to carry on.
it is also immaterial, on this definition that the assessees may not have had a motive of making a profit or gain on these sales though on the facts, it is clear that such motive must have existed and, in any event, could not be ruled out.
the reference to a casual dealer in the second definition also renders it immaterial that the assessees may not have intended to be regular dealers in sleepers, timber, firewood or charcoal but that this was something casual or incidental to the acquisition and exploitation of a forest for running a plantation.
39.
in state of t.n. v. m.k. kandaswami,  1975  4 scc 745, this court while determining the interpretation of the term dealer under the madras general sales tax act, 1959 gave a broad interpretation to include a person who not only carries on business of selling, supplying or distributing goods but also the one who carries on the business of buying only.
40.
in karya palak engineer, cpwd v. rajasthan taxation board,  2004  7 scc 195, this court held that a contractor, despite not being the owner but merely the custodian of the goods, as a dealer under the rajasthan sales tax act, 1994.
41.
in state of orissa v. titaghur paper mills company limited, 1985 supp scc 280, while ascertaining whether the central government or its agents could be treated as be dealer, this court observed as follows 26.
what is pertinent to note about the new definition of dealer is that in the case of the central government, a state government or any of their employees acting in official capacity on behalf of such government, it is not necessary that the purchase, sale, supply or distribution of goods should be in the course of business, while in all other cases for a person to be a dealer he must be carrying on the business of purchasing, selling, supplying or distributing goods.
42.
in food corporation of india v. state of kerala,  1997  3 scc 410, this court was ascertaining whether the procurement of food grains by the food corporation of india, pursuant to levy orders could amount to sale or purchase to incur sales purchase tax liability as levied by the states.
this court held that since there was no statutory compulsion in the matter of sale or purchase of fertilizers and parties had the discretion to enter into consensual contractual agreements subject minimal restrictions such as price fixation, quota requirements, etc., there is no hesitation in holding that the activity of distribution of fertilizers, pursuant to levy orders would amount to sale which is eligible to incur tax liability.
this court stated that supply or distribution of goods need not be in course of business to be considered a sale.
43.
thus, on perusal of the aforesaid decisions of this court, we are of the view that the definition of dealer under various sales tax legislations has been given a broad and inclusive interpretation.
it would be gainsaid to state that such a broad and expansive interpretation is in consonance with what the legislature intended with regard to imposing sales tax liability on all transactions of sale of goods.
therefore, it can be concluded that the definition of a dealer under the act, 1963, would include persons, if they are involved in carrying on any business or trading activity, such as the sale of machinery as in the present case.
therefore, as a necessary sequitur, the company in liquidation, whose assets are sold by way of an auction, would be a dealer under the act, 1963.
44. section 5 of the act, 1963 is the charging provision with regard to imposition of sales tax.
it envisages levy of tax on sale or purchase of goods by a dealer.
section 5 1  of the act, 1963 imposes liability on every dealer whose total turnover for one year is not less than two lakh rupees.
section 5 1  i  enumerates tax liability in case of goods specified in the first or second schedule to the act, 1963 at the rates and only at the points specified against such goods in the said schedules.
serial number84 i  of the first schedule stipulates the rate of tax payable on sale of, inter alia, machinery.
in this regard, the point of levy of sales tax is at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 of the act, 1963.
45.
thus, pursuant to section 5 of the act, 1963, in the case of goods specified in the first and second schedule, the single point tax could be levied only at the rates and points specified against such goods in the said schedules.
the first schedule specifies that the point of levy of tax for the goods in question could be only at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer.
in the instant case, the dealer under the act, 1963 would be liable to pay sales tax for the machinery sold at the point of first sale, as per section 5 read with the first schedule of the act, 1963.
in light of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the transaction in question in the present appeal would be exigible to tax under section 5 1  of the act, 1963.
46.
section 5-a of the act, 1963 stipulates certain situations wherein purchase tax could be imposed on any dealer who purchases any goods, either from a registered dealer or from any other person, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under act, 1963.
the aforesaid provision however will apply only in circumstances when no tax is payable under sub-sections  1 , 3 , 4 , 5  of section 5.
however, as noticed hereinabove, the given transaction is exigible to tax under section 5 1  of the act, 1963, and therefore tax liability under section 5a of the act, 1963 would not apply to the said transaction.
47.
before delving into whether the official liquidator could also be treated as a dealer under the act, 1963, it would be apposite to take into account the powers of the official liquidator, as provided under the act, 1956.
the official liquidator, i