--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner the life insurance corporation of india vs. respondent d. j. bahadur ors.
date of judgment10/11/1980 bench krishnaiyer, v.r. bench krishnaiyer, v.r. pathak, r.s. koshal, a.d. citation 1980 air 2181 1981 scr  1 1083 1981 scc  1  315 citator info r 1981 sc1829  75  c 1982 sc1126  3,7,12,13,16,18,19  rf 1984 sc1130  33,34,40  f 1987 sc1527  17,28  rf 1991 sc 855  53  act life insurance corporation act  act 31 , 1956, sections 11, 23 and 49, scope of-whether a general law or a special law-industrial disputes act  act 14  1947, sections 9a, 19 2 ,  6 , 18, 23, 29-object of the act, award and settlement, distinction from the point of view of legal force-whether a special legislation vis-a-vis life insurance corporation act-annual cash bonus payable to class-iii and class-iv employees of the corporation under the settlement of 1974, effect of-effect of notice of termination of the settlements by the corporation under sections 9a and 19 2  of the industrial disputes act and section 49 of the life insurance corporation act-constitution of india, 1950, articles 12, 38, 39 and 43 and regulation 58 of the life insurance corporation of india  staff  regulations, 1960.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

headnote the life insurance corporation came into existence on the 1st of september, 1956, as a statutory authority established under the life insurance corporation act  act 31 , 1956.
as from the said date all institutions carrying on life insurance business in india were nationalised to the extent of such business and their corresponding assets and liabilities were transferred to the corporation.
section 11 of the act provided for the transfer of service of those employees of such institutions who were connected with life insurance business immediately before the said date to the corporation and for some other matters.
section 23 of the life insurance corporation act gave to the corporation the power to employ such number of persons as it thought fit for the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under the act and declared that every person so employed or whose services stood transferred to the corporation under section 11 would be liable to serve anywhere in india.
section 49 conferred on the corporation the power to make regulations for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the act with the previous approval of the central government.
sub-section  2  of that section enumerated various matters in relation to which such power was particularly conferred.
on 1st of june, 1957 the central government promulgated the life insurance corporation  alteration of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of employees  order, 1957 altering the remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of those employees of the corporation whose service had been transferred to it under sub-section  1  of section 11. clause 9 of the 1957 order declared that no bonus would be paid but directed that the corporation would set aside an amount every year for expenditure on schemes of general benefit to the employees such as free insurance scheme, medical benefit scheme and other amenities to them.
on the 26th june, 1959, the central government amended clause 9 of the 1957 order so as to provide that non-profit sharing bonus would be paid to those employees of the corporation whose salary did not exceed rs. 500 per month.
on 2nd of july, 1959 there was a settlement between the corporation and its employees providing for payment to them of cash bonus at the rate of 1 1/2 1084 months basic salary for the period from the 1st september, 1956 to the 31st december, 1961.
in the year 1960 the life insurance corporation of india  staff  regulations, 1960 were framed and regulation 58 dealt with the payment of grant of non-profit sharing bonus to its employees.
on 14th april, 1962 and 3rd august, 1963 orders were again issued, the effect of which was to remove the limit of rs. 500 on the basic salary as a condition of eligibility for payment of bonus.
the settlement dated 2nd july, 1959 was followed by three others which were arrived at on the 29th january, 1963.
the 20th june, 1970 and the 26th june, 1972, respectively and each one of which provided for payment of bonus at a particular rate.
disputes between the corporation and its workmen in regard to the latters conditions of service were received by two settlements dated the 24th january, 1974 and the 6th february, 1974, arrived at in pursuance of the provisions of section 18 read with section 2 p  of the industrial disputes act.
the corporation was a party to both the settlements which were identical in terms.
however, while four of the five unions of workmen subscribed to the first settlement, the fifth union was a signatory to the second.
the settlements provided for revised scales of pay, the method of their fixation and dearness and other allowances as well as bonus.
the settlements were approved by the board of the corporation and also by the central government.
the employees of the corporation having opted for the new scales of pay, bonus was paid in accordance therewith for the years 1973-74 and 1974-75 in april 1974 and in april 1975 respectively.
one of the payment of bonus  amendment  act, 1976 coming into force with retrospective effect from 25th september, 1975 curtailing the rights of employees of industrial undertakings to bonus, though it was inapplicable to the corporation by virtue of the provisions of section 32 of the payment of bonus act, the payment of bonus for the year 1975-76 to the employees of the corporation was stopped under instructions from the central government, whose action in that behalf was challenged by the employees through a petition under article 226 of the constitution of india in the high court of calcutta.
the single judge of the high court issued a writ of mandamus directing the corporation to act in accordance with the terms of the settlement dated the 24th of january, 1974.
the corporation preferred a letters patent appeal against the decision of the learned single judge and that appeal was pending disposal when the central government promulgated the life insurance corporation  modification of settlement  act, 1976 on 29th may, 1976.
the said act was challenged by the workmen in the supreme court which by a judgment dated 21st february, 1980  madan mohan pathak v. union of india, 1978 3 scr 334  declared it to be void as offending article 31 2  of the constitution of india and directed the corporation to forbear from implementing the 1976 act and to pay to its class-iii and class-iv employees bonus for the years 1st april 1975 to 31st march 1976 and 1st april 1976 to 31st march 1977 in accordance with the terms of sub-clause  ii  of clause 8 of each settlement.
on 3rd march, 1978 the corporation issued to its workmen a notice under sub-section  2  of section 19 of the industrial disputes act declaring its intention to terminate the settlements on the expiry of a period of two months from the date of the notice was served.
the notice, however mentioned in express terms that according to the corporation no such notice was really necessary for termination of the settlements.
on the same date, another notice was issued by the corporation under section 9a of the industrial 1085 disputes act stating that it intended to effect a change in accordance with the contents of the annexure to the notice, as from the 1st june, 1978, in the conditions of service of its workmen.
on 26th may, 1978, the central government issued a notification under section 49 of the life insurance corporation act substituting a new regulation for the then existing regulation bearing serial number 58.
the new regulation was to come into force from the 1st of june, 1978.
simultaneously, an amendment on the same lines was made in the 1957 order by the substitution of a new clause for the then existing clause 9 in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section  2  of section 11 of the l. i. c. act.
these two notices dated 3rd march, 1978 by the corporation under sections 19 2  and 9a of the industrial disputes act respectively and the action taken by the central government on the 26th may, 1978 by making new provisions in regard to the payment of bonus to the corporations employees were challenged successfully by the workmen in a petition to the allahabad high court under article 226 of the constitution of india and hence the appeal by the corporation.
allowing the appeal by majority, the court held per iyer, j.-a.
the industrial disputes act is a benign measure which seeks to pre-empt industrial tensions, provide the mechanics of dispute resolutions and set up the necessary infra-structure so that the energies of partners in production may not be dissipated in counter-productive battles and assurance of industrial justice may create a climate of goodwill.
its object is the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes.
parliament has picked out the specific subject of industrial disputes for particularised treatment, whether the industry be in the private or public sector or otherwise.
the meat of the statute is industrial dispute, not conditions of employment or contract of service as such.
1106e, 1110d, 1111b-c bangalore water supply and sewerage board v. rajappa, 1978 2 scc 213, applied.
b.  1  the industrial disputes act substantially equates an award with a settlement, from the point of view of their legal force.
no distinction in regard to the nature and period of their effect can be discerned, especially when one reads section 19 2  and  6 .
further, it is clear from section 18 that a settlement, like an award, is also binding.
thus both settlements and awards stand on the same footing.
1109f, g, 1109 e  2  there are three stages or phases with different legal effects in the life of an award or settlement.
there is a specific period contractually or statutorily fixed as the period of operation.
thereafter, the award or settlement does not become non est, but continues to be binding.
this is the second chapter of legal efficacy but qualitatively different.
then comes the last phase.
if notice of intention to terminate is given under section 19 2  or 19 6 , then the third stage opens where the award or the settlement does survive and is in force between the parties as a contract which has superseded the earlier contract and subsists until a new award or negotiated settlement takes its place.
like nature, law abhors a vacuum and even on the notice of termination under section 19 2  or  6 , the sequence and 1086 consequence cannot be just void but a continuance of the earlier terms, but with liberty to both sides to raise disputes, negotiate settlements or seek a reference and award.
until such a new contract or award replaces the previous one, the former settlement or award will regulate the relation between the parties.
industrial law frowns upon a lawless void and under general law the contract of service created by an award or settlement lives so long as a new lawful contract is brought into being.
1114 a-f  3  the precedents on the point, the principles of industrial law, the constitutional empathy of part iv and the sound rules of statutory construction converge to the same point that when a notice intimating termination of an award or settlement is issued the legal import in merely that the stage is set for fresh negotiations or industrial adjudication and until either effort ripens into a fresh set of conditions of service the previous award or settlement does regulate the relations between the employer and the employees.
1124 f-g judhisthir chandra v. mukherjee, air 1950 cal.
577 mangaldas narandas v. payment of wages authority etc.,  1957  ii llj 256  bombay d. b.  workmen of new elphinstone theatre v. new elphinstone theatre,  1961   i llj 105  119   madras  yamuna mills company limited v. majdoor mahajan mandal, baroda ors.
,  1957   i llj 620  bom.   sathya studios v. labour court,  1978   i llj 227  madras  maruti mahipati mullick anr.
v. m s. polson limited anr.,  1970  lab.
i. c. 308  bom. , approved.
south indian bank limited v. a. r. chako, 1964 4 scr 625 management of indian oil corporation limited v. its workmen, 1 scr 110 md.
qasim larry, factory manages, sasamusa sugar works v. md. samsuddin anr., 1964 7 scr 419 followed.   4  the settlement under the i. d. act does not suffer death merely because of the notice issued under section 19 2 .
all that is done is a notice intimating its intention to terminate the award.
the award even if it ceases to be operative qua award, continues qua contract.
therefore, if the industrial disputes act regulates the jural relations between the l. i. c. and its employees-an if-then the rights under the settlements of 1974 remain until replaced by a later award or settlement.
1124 g-h, 1125 a-b c.  1  in determining whether a statute is a special or a general one.
the focus must be on the principal subject matter plus the particular perspective.
for certain purposes, the act may be general and for certain other purposes it may be special.
1127 b-c  2  the life insurance corporation act is not a law for employment or disputes arising therefrom, but a nationalisation measure which incidentally, like in any general take-over legislation, provides for recruitment, transfers, promotions and the like.
it is special vis-a-vis nationalisation of life insurance, but general regarding contracts of employment or acquiring office buildings.
emergency measures are special, for sure, regular nationalisation statutes are general even if they incidentally refer to conditions of service.
1111 h, 1112 a-b  3  so far as nationalisation of insurance business is concerned, the life insurance corporation is a special legislation, but equally indubitably is the inference, from a bare perusal of the subject, scheme and sections and understanding of the anatomy of the act, that it has nothing to do with the particular problem of disputes between employer and employees, and of investigation and adjudication of labour dispute.
1126 g-h, 1127 a 1087 on the other hand, the industrial disputes act is a special statute devoted wholly to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes which provides definitionally for the nature of industrial disputes coming within its ambit.
it creates an infra-structure for investigation into, solution of and adjudication upon industrial disputes.
it also provides machinery for enforcement of awards and settlements.
from alpha to omega the i. d. act has one special mission-the resolution of industrial disputes through specialised agencies according to specialised procedures and with special reference to the weaker categories of employees coming within the definition of workmen.
therefore, with reference to industrial disputes between employers and workmen, the i. d. act is a special statute, and the l. i. c. act does not speak at all with specific reference to workmen.
on the other hand, its powers relate to the general aspects of nationalisation, of management when private businesses are nationalised and a plurality of problems which, incidentally, involve transfer of service of existing employees of insurers.
the workmen qua workmen and industrial disputes between workmen and the employer as such, are beyond the orbit of and have no specific or special place in the scheme of the l.i.c.
act.
1127 c-f  4  thus, vis-a-vis industrial disputes at the termination of the settlement as between the workmen and the corporation, the i. d. act is a special legislation and the l. i. c. act a general legislation.
likewise, when compensation on nationalisation is the question, the l. i. c. act is the special statute.
an application of the generalia maxim makes it clear that the i. d. act being special law, prevails over l. i. c. act which is a general law.
1127 h, 1128 a-b u. p. state electricity board v. h. s. jain, 1979 1 scr 355, j. k. cotton spinning and weaving mills company limited v. state of uttar pradesh, air 1961 sc 1170 at 1174, followed.   5  section 11 of the life insurance corporation act, 1956 does not repel the industrial disputes act, 1947.
the provisions of the l. i. c. act which contained provisions regarding conditions of service of employees would not become redundant, if the i. d. act was held to prevail.
for one thing, the provisions of sections 11 and 49 are the usual general provisions giving a statutory corporation power to recruit and prescribe conditions of service of its total staff-not anything special regarding workmen.
secondly, no case of redundant words arose because the corporation, like a university, employed not only workmen but others also and to regulate their conditions of service power was needed.
again, institutions where no dispute arose.
power in the employer to fix the terms of employment had to be vested.
1129 f-h, 1130 a-b bangalore water supply and sewarage board v. rajappa, 1978 2 scc 813 d. n. banerji v. p. r. mukherjee ors.
1953 scr 302, followed.   6  whatever be the powers of regulation of conditions of service, including payment or non-payment of bonus enjoyed by the employees of the corporation under the l. i. c. act subject to the directives of the central government, they stem from a general act and cannot supplant, subvert or substitute the special legislation which specifically deals with industrial disputes between workmen and their employees.
1131 f-h the court directed the corporation to fulfil its obligations in terms of the 1974 settlements and start negotiations like a model employer, for a fair settlement of the conditions of service between itself and its employees having 1088 realistic and equitable regard to the prevailing conditions of life, principles of industrial justice and the directives underlying part iv of the constitution.
per pathak j.  concurring with iyer, j.   1  both the limbs of sub-section  2  of section 11 of the l. i. c. act, 1956 are intended to constitute a composite process of rationalising the scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of transferred employees with a view not only to effecting a standardisation between the transferred employees but also to revising their scales of remuneration, and terms and conditions of service to a pattern, which will enable the newly established corporation to become a viable and commercially successful enterprise.
for that reason, it is open to the central government under the sub-section to ignore the guarantee contained in sub- section  1  of section 11 in favour of the employees or anything contained in the industrial disputes act, 1947 or any other law for the time being in force or any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force.
1135 d-g the second limb of sub-section  2  of section 11 is not related to employees generally, that is to say, both transferred and newly recruited employees, of the corporation.
it is confined to transferred employees.
there is no danger of an order made by the central government under the second limb of subsection  2  in respect of transferred employees being struck down on the ground that it violates the equality provisions of part iii of the constitution because similar action has not been taken in respect of newly recruited employees.
so long as such order is confined to what is necessitated by the process of transfer and integration, the transferred employees constitute a reasonably defined class in themselves and form no common basis with newly recruited employees.
1136 c-e the power under the second limb of sub-section  2  of section 11 can be exercised more than once.
to effectuate the transfer appropriately and completely it may be necessary to pass through different stages, and at each stage to make a definite order.
so long as the complex of orders so made is necessarily linked with the process of transfer and integration, it is immaterial that a succession of orders is made.
the deletion of the words from time to time found in the bill, is of no consequence.
1136 e-g  2  the notification dated 26th may, 1980 purporting to amend the standardisation order is invalid.
it has no effect on the right to bonus by the workmen.
the notification was intended to apply to transferred employees only.
it declares explicitly that the central government is satisfied that a revision of the terms and conditions of service of the transferred employees is considered necessary.
this is made explicit by the circumstance that identical provisions have been made by the corporation, with the prior approval of the central government, in the new regulation 58 of a notification issued under both clauses  b  and  bb .
1137 a-c  3  a settlement under the industrial disputes act, in essence, is a contract between the employer and the workmen prescribing new terms and conditions.
as soon as the settlement is concluded and becomes operative, the contract embodied in it takes effect and the existing terms and conditions of the workmen are modified accordingly.
unless there is something to the contrary in a particular term or condition of the settlement the embodied contract 1089 endures indefinitely, continuing to govern the relation between the parties in future, subject of course to subsequent alteration through a fresh settlement, award or valid legislation.
settlement is not only a contract but something more.
conceptually, it is a settlement.
it concludes or settles a dispute.
in order the new contract be afforded a chance of being effectively worked out a mandate obliging the parties to unreservedly comply with it for a period of time is desirable.
it was made binding by the statute for such period.
on the expiry of such period, the ban lifts, and the parties are at liberty to seek an alteration of the contract.
1138 e-h-1139 a-c the law laid down in south indian bank limited v. a. r. chacko 1964 5 scr 825 and md.
quasim larry, factory manager, sasamusa sugar works v. md.
shamsuddin anr., 1964 7 scr 419 in respect of an award applies equally in relation to a settlement.
1140b  4  the industrial disputes act is a special law and must prevail over the corporation act, a general law, for the purpose of protecting the sanctity of transactions concluded under the former enactment.
regulation 58, a product of the corporation act, cannot supersede the contract respecting bonus between the parties resulting from the settlement of 1974.
1142 b-d plainly, if a settlement resolves an industrial dispute under the industrial disputes act, it pertains to the central purpose of that act.
this constitutes a special law in respect of a settlement reached under the auspices between an employer and his workmen employees.
the consequences of such settlement are the product of the special law.
1141 e-f the corporation act was enacted primarily for effecting the nationalisation of life insurance business by transferring all such business to a corporation established for that purpose.
clearly, the object behind section 11 1 , section 23 and clauses  b  and  bb  of section 49 2  of the l. i. c. act is to provide staff and labour for the purpose of the proper management of the nationalised life insurance business.
the corporation act does not possess the features found in the industrial disputes act.
no special provision exists in regard to industrial disputes and their resolution and the consequences of that resolution.
the special jurisdiction created for the purpose under the industrial disputes act is not the subject matter of the corporation act at all.
no corresponding provision in the corporation act, a subsequent enactment, deals with the subject matter enacted in the industrial disputes act.
1140 f, 1141 a, f- g yet parliament intended to provide for the corporations workmen employees the same opportunities as are available under the industrial disputes act to the workmen of other employers, as demonstrated by section 2 a  1  of the corporation act.
the expression appropriate government is specifically defined by it in relation to an industrial dispute concerning the life insurance corporation.
both the central government and the corporation understood the industrial disputes act in that light, for, regulation 51 2  of the  staff  regulations made by the corporation under clauses  b  and  bb  of section 49 2  of the corporation act, with the previous approval of the central government, speaks of giving effect to a revision of scales of pay, dearness allowance, or other allowances in pursuance of any award, agreement or settlement.
1141 g-h, 1142 a-c life insurance corporation of india v. sunil kumar mukherjee, 1964 5 scr 528 sukhder singh v. bhagat ram, 1975 3 scr 619, referred to.
1090 u. p. state electricity board ors.
v. hari shanker jain ors.
1979 1 scr 355 j. k. cotton spinning and weaving mills company limited, v. state of uttar pradesh, air 1961 sc 1170, followed.
mary sawards v. the owner of the vera cruz, 1884 10 a. c 59 68, quoted with approval.   5  in construing the scope of the corporations powers under section 11  1  of the corporation act, appropriate importance should be attached to the qualifying word duly.
when the corporation seeks to alter the terms and conditions of transferred employees, it must do so in accordance with law, and that requires it to pay proper regard to the sanctity of rights-acquired by the workmen employees under settlements or awards under the industrial disputes act.
1142 h, 1143 a-b the provision in section 11 2  has been made for the purpose of protecting the interests of the corporation and its policy holders.
the policy holders constitute an important and significant sector of public interest.
indeed, the avowed object of the entire corporation act is to provide absolute security to the policy holders in the matter of their life insurance protection.
that is assured by a wise management of the corporations business, and by ensuring that when settlements are negotiated between the corporation and its workmen or when industrial adjudication is initiated in labour court and industrial tribunals, the protection of the policy holders will find appropriately significant emphasis in the deliberations.
1143 d-e  6  in the view that the notification dated 26th may, 1978 purporting to amend the standardisation order by substituting clause  a  is invalid and the newly enacted regulation 58 does not effect the contract in respect of bonus embodied in the settlements of 1974 between the life insurance corporation and its workmen employees, effect must be given to that contract.
if the terms and conditions of service created by the contract need to be reconsidered, recourse must be had to the modes recognised by law- negotiated settlement, industrial adjudication or appropriate legislation.
1143 f-g per koshal, j.  contra   1  the industrial disputes act deals with the adjudication or settlement of disputes between an employer and his workmen and would, therefore, be a special law vis-a-vis another statute which covers a larger field and may thus be considered general as compared to it.
it cannot, however, be regarded as a special law in relation to all other laws irrespective of the subject matter dealt with by them.
in fact a law may be special when considered in relation to another piece of legislation but only a general one vis-a-vis still another.
special and general are relative terms and it is the content of one statute as compared to the other that will determine which of the two is to be regarded as special in relation to the other.
viewed in this light the proposition, namely, the industrial disputes act is a special law because it deals with adjudication and settlement of matters in dispute between an employer and his workmen while the life insurance corporation act is a general law cannot stand scrutiny.
the industrial disputes act would no doubt be a special act in relation to a law which makes provisions for matters wider than but inclusive of those covered by it, such as the indian contract act as that is a law relating to contracts generally  including those between an industrial employer and his workmen  but it would lose that categorisation and must be regarded as a general law when its rival is shown to operate in a field narrower than its own and such a rival is that part of the life insurance corporation act which deals with 1091 conditions of service of the employees of the life insurance corporation-a single industrial undertaking of a special type  as opposed to all others of its kind which fall within the ambit of the industrial disputes act.
where the competition is between these two acts, therefore, the life insurance corporation act must be regarded as a special law and  in comparison thereto  the industrial disputes act as a general law.
1153 e-f, h, 1154 a-c  1a  section 11 and clauses  b  and  bb  of sub-section 2 of section 49 of the life insurance corporation act were intended to be and do constitute an exhaustive and overriding law governing the condition of service of all employees of the corporation including transferred employees.
the proposition, namely that the industrial disputes act being a special law, would override a general law like the life insurance corporation act, is incorrect.
even if the industrial disputes act is regarded as a special law in comparison to the life insurance corporation act, the result would be the same.
1162e-f, 1153 e  1b  the general rule to be followed in the case of a conflict between two statutes is that the later abrogates the earlier one  leges posteriors priors contrarias abrogant .
to this general rule there is a well known exception, namely, generalia specialibus non derogant  general things do not derogate from special things .
in other words, a prior special law would yield to a later general law, if either of the following two conditions is satisfied   i  the two are inconsistent with each other.   ii  there is some express reference in the later to the earlier enactment.
if either of these conditions is fulfilled the later law, even though general, will prevail.
further four tests deductible from the several texts on interpretation of statutes are  i  the legislature has the undoubted right to alter a law already promulgated by it through subsequent legislation.   ii  a special law may be altered, abrogated or repealed by a later general law through an express provision.   iii  a later general law will override a prior special law if the two are so repugnant to each other that they cannot co-exist even though no express provision in that behalf is found in the general law.   iv  it is only in the absence of a provision to the contrary and of a clear inconsistency that a special law will remain wholly unaffected by a later general law.
1145 e, g-h, 1156 c-d  2  the proposition that the industrial dispute act being a special law would override a general law like the life insurance corporation act is equally insupportable even if the industrial disputes act is regarded as a special law in connection with the life insurance corporation act.
the word duly, in section 11 1  of the life insurance corporation act means properly, regularly or in due manner.
in the context in which it is used it may legitimately be given a more restricted meaning, namely, in accordance with law.
if reference to the provisions of the industrial disputes act alone was contemplated and the alterations envisaged were merely such as could be achieved by a settlement or award resulting from a compliance thereof, not only would the expression by the corporation become redundant  which would not be a situation conforming to the well-known principle of interpretation of statutes that a construction which leaves without effect any part of the language of a statute will normally be rejected  but the express provisions of clause  bb  of sub-section  2  of section 49 of the life insurance corporation act, which invest the corporation with power to make regulations  albeit with the approval of the central government  laying down the terms and conditions of service of the transferred employees would also be rendered otiose.
to the extent, 1092 therefore, that section 11 1  read with that clause confers on the corporation the power to alter the terms and conditions in question-a power not enjoyed by it under the provisions of the industrial disputes act-it is inconsistent with the industrial disputes act and being a later law, would override that act despite the absence of the non- obstante clause, the inconsistency having arisen from express language and not from mere implication.
in other words, sub-section  2  of section 11 not only gives to the central government the power to alter the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the corporation in certain situations, and to alter them even to the detriment of such employees to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit, but also states in so many words that such power shall be exercisable notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  1  or the industrial disputes act 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force.
the mandate of the legislature has been expressed in clear and unambiguous terms in this non-obstante clause and is to the effect that the power of the central government to alter conditions of service of the employees of the corporation shall be wholly unfettered and that any provisions to the contrary contained in the industrial disputes act or for that matter, in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement, or agreement for the time being in force, would not stand in the way of the exercise of that power even if such exercise is to the detriment of the employees of the corporation.
the conferment of the power is thus in express supersession of the industrial disputes act and of any sett