--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner s. pratap singh vs. respondent the state of punjab date of judgment 02/09/1963 bench ayyangar, n. rajagopala bench ayyangar, n. rajagopala das, sudhi ranjan subbarao, k. dayal, raghubar mudholkar, j.r. citation 1964 air 72 1964 scr  4  733 citator info r 1965 sc 596  11  r 1967 sc 295  58,60  r 1968 sc 147  6  r 1970 sc 214  14  r 1971 sc 530  233,234,235,387  r 1971 sc1162  18,19,20  r 1972 sc1004  54  r 1973 sc 157  
21  r 1975 sc 550  9  r 1976 sc1207  357  r 1976 sc1737  6  rf 1977 sc 629  16  r 1979 sc 220  24  r 1982 sc1043  15  r 1986 sc 3  145  r 1986 sc 872  118,126  rf 1991 sc2160  20  rf 1992 sc 604  112  act punjab civil services  punishment and appeal  rules, 1952, rr. 3, 26 d , 8, 15--grant of leave-power to revoke-date of leave preparatory to retirement--if date of retirement--communication of revocation after retirement- when effective-right to retire--restriction on-constitution of india, 1950, arts.
19 and 23-validity of r. 326 d .
tape record of conversations-if legal evidence-weight of.
government-order of revocation of leave and suspension of civil servant-power- exercised mala fide and on extraneous considerations-high court-jurisdiction to interfere under art.
226 of the constitution.
headnote the appellant was a civil surgeon in the employment of the state of punjab having joined the punjab civil medical service in 1947.
in 1956 he was posted to jullunder where he remained till he proceeded on leave preparatory to retirement sometime in december 1960.
his leave was sanctioned on december 18, 1960, and was notified in the punjab gazette dated january 27, 1961.
on june 3, 1961, the governor of punjab passed orders suspending the appellant with immediate effect and revoking his leave as the government had decided that a departmental enquiry be instituted against him under s. 7 of the punjab civil services  punishment and appeal  rules, 1952.
the governor further passed an order under r. 3.26 d  by which a government servant under suspension on a charge of misconduct shall not be  permitted to retire on his reaching the date of compulsory retirement but should be retained in service until the enquiry into the charge is concluded and a-final order is passed thereon.
the order under r. 3.26 d  was that in view of the appellants reaching the age of superannuation on june 16, 1961, he should be retained in service beyond that date till the completion of the departmental enquiry.
these orders reached the appellant, according to him, only on june 19, 1961, but they were published in the punjab government gazette extraordinary dated june 10, 1961.
by a writ petition filed under art.
226 of the constitution of india before the high court of punjab, the appellant challenged the legality of the orders of suspension, revocation of leave, retention in service after the date of superannuation and institution of the departmental enquiry, on the grounds inter alia,  1  that the rules governing his service did not empower the governor to pass the impugned orders, and  2  that the impugned orders were passed mala fide by or at the instance 734 of the chief minister, who was in-charge of the department of health and who was personally hostile to him by reason of certain incidents, and that the orders were promoted by the desire on the part of the chief minister to wreak personally his vengeance on the appellant.
held i  under r. 8.15 of the punjab civil services  punishment and appeal  rules there is no restriction on the power of revocation of leave with respect to the time when it is to be exercised, and the authority empowered to grant leave has the discretion to revoke it even after the officer to whom leave had been sanctioned had proceeded on leave,  ii the date from which a government servant is on leave preparatory to retirement cannot be treated as the date of his retirement from service, and an order of suspension of the government servant during such leave is valid.  
iii though the orders of suspension and revocation dated june 3, 1961, were actually communicated to the appellant only after the date of his retirement, since he was on leave the said orders were effective from the moment they were issued.
bachhittar singh v. state of punjab, a.i.r. 1963 s.c. 395 and state of punjab v. sodhi sukhdev singh, 1961 2 s.c.r.
371, distinguished.  
iv the appellant had no absolute right to opt for retire- ment on his attaining the age of superannuation, that any such option was subject to r. 3.26 d  which applied to him and that his case came under that rule as he was on the date of his compulsory retirement under suspension on charges of misconduct.  
v whenever any charge of misconduct is under enquiry by the government, be it informally or formally, the government is competent to suspend the government servant and, if the requirements ofthe case require, to take action under s. 3.26 d .  
vi the provisions of r. 3.26 d  do not contravene arts.
19 and 23 of the constitution of india.  
vii

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

rendering of the tape recorded conversation can be legal evidence by way of corroborating the statements of a person who deposes that the other speaker and he carried on that conversation or even of the statement of a person who may depose that he overheard the conversation between the two persons and what they actually stated bad been tape recorded.
weight to be given to such evidence will depend on the other factors which may be established in a particular case.
per das, subba rao and rajagopala ayyangar, jj.- i  where an authority exercising a power has taken into account as a relevant factor something which it could not properly take info account, the exercise of the power would be bad.
where the purposes sought to be achieved are mixed, some relevant and some alien to the purpose, the difficulty is resolved by finding the 735 dominant purpose which impelled the action, and where the power itself is conditioned by a purpose, the courts would invalidate the exercise of the power when an irrelevant purpose is proved to have entered the mind of the authority.   ii the court is not an appellate forum where the correct- ness of an order of government could be canvassed and it has no jurisdiction to substitute its own view as to the necessity or desirability of initiating disciplinary proceedings, for the entirety of the power, jurisdiction in that regard is vested in law inthe government.
the only question which could be consideredby the court is whether the authority vested with the power has paid attention to or taken into account circumstances, eventsor ma tters wholly extraneous to the purpose for which the powerwas veste d, or whether the proceedings have been initiated malafide for satisfying a private or personal grudge of the authority against the officer.
if the act is in excess of the power granted or is an abuse or misuse of power, the matter is capable of interference and rectification by the court.   iii it is not correct to say that mala fides in the sense of improper motive could be established only by direct evidence, that is, that it must be discernible from the order impugned or must be shown from the noting in the file which preceded that order.
if bad faith would vitiate the order, the same can be deduced as a reasonable and inescapable inference from proved facts.
municipal council of sydney v. cambell, 1925 a.c. 338, short v. poole corporation 1926 1 ch. 66, vatcher v. paull, 1915 a.c. 372, sadler v. shefield corporation, 19241 1 ch. 483, earl fitzwilliam v. minister of t. c. planning, 119511 2 k. b. 284 and general assembly of free church v. overatoun, 1904 a.c. 515, relied on.
per dayal and mudholkar, jj.  dissenting .
on the facts, the dominant motive which induced the government to take ac- tion against the appellant was not to take disciplinary proceedings against him for misconduct which it bona fide believed he had committed, but to wreak vengeance on him for incurring his wrath and for the discredit that he had brought on the chief minister the impugned orders were vitiated by mala fides, in that they were motivated by an improper purpose which was outside that for which the power of discretion was conferred on government and the said orders revoking the leave granted and placing the appellant under suspension and directing an enquiry into the charges against him, should be set aside.
quaere, whether the provision in art.
310 1  of the consti- tution of india that members of a civil service of a state hold office during the pleasure of the governor, conferred a power on the state government to compel an officer to continue in service of the state against his will apart from service rules which might govern the matter even after the age of superannuation was reached.
736 judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 80 of 1963.
appeal from the judgment and order dated april 4, 1962, of the punjab high court in civil writ number 961 of 1961.
the appellant appeared in person.
c.k. daphtary, attorney general, mohinder singh punnu, deputy advocate-general, punjab and b. r. g. k. achar for p. d. menon, for the respondent.
september 2, 1963.
the judgment of s. k. das, k. subba rao and n. rajagopala ayyangar, jj., was delivered by n. rajagopala ayyangar, jj.
the dissenting opinion of raghubar dayal and j. r. mudholkar, jj., was delivered by raghubar dayal, j. ayyangar, j.-this appeal is against a judgment of the high court, punjab, dismissing a petition filed by the appellant in that court under art.
226 of the constitution and has been preferred pursuant to a certificate of fitness granted under art.
133 1   c .
the appellant was a civil surgeon in the employment of the state government who had been granted leave preparatory to retirement, and subsequently, in june 1961, orders were passed by government  1  revoking the leave he had originally been granted and recalling him to duty,  2  simultaneously placing him under suspension pending the result of an inquiry into certain charges of misconduct, and  3  ordering a departmental inquiry against him.
the legality of these orders was challenged by the appellant in the petition that he filed in the high court.
the petition was dismissed by the learned judges, but on application by the appellant, he was granted a certificate of fitness on the strength of which he has filed the present appeal.
the facts of the case leading up to the appeal before us are set out by our learned brother dayal, j. in his judgment fully and in great detail and so we have thought it unneces- sary to cumber this judgment with them.
two points were urged before us by the appellant who argued the case in person and presented the facts and the law with commend- able clarity and moderation.
the first of them was that every one of the impugned orders of june 1961   a  recalling him from the leave previously granted,  b  placing him under suspension pending an inquiry, and  c  starting an inquiry against him were illegal for the reason that such action on the part of government was contrary to and not permitted by the relevant service rules applicable to him.
the second ground of challenge was that these orders, assuming them to be within the power of government on a proper interpretation of the rules were passed mala fide, by or at the instance of the chief minister, punjab, who was personally hostile to him by reason of certain incidents and circumstances which he set out and that the impugned orders were prompted by the desire on the part of the chief minister to wreak personally his vengeance on the appellant.
the relevant rules on the topic as well as their interpre- tation have all been dealt in the judgment of dayal, j., and we agree in the main with his conclusion that the orders impugned were not beyond the power of the government.
we should, however, add that we should not be taken to have accepted the interpretation which dayal, j., has placed on each one of the several rules which he has considered.
besides, we should not be taken to have acceded to the submission of the learned attorney-general who appeared for the respondent-state, that the provision in art.
310 1  of the constitution that members of a civil service of a state hold office during the pleasure of the governor, conferred a power on the state government to compel an officer to continue in service of the state against his will apart from service rules which might govern the matter even after the age of superannuation was reached, or where he was employed for a defined term, even after the term of his appointment was over.
we consider that to construe the expression the pleasure of the governor in that manner would be patently unwarranted besides being contrary to what this court said in state of bihar v. abdul majid 1 .
in the view which we have taken on the second ground of challenge to the orders of government we have not considered it necessary to examine in detail the several rules to which our attention was drawn or their proper interpretation.
we shall now proceed to deal with the second point  1  1954 s.c.r.
786 at p. 799.
urged before us viz., that the order was passed mala fide and so could not be allowed to stand.
before entering into the details of the allegations made, the evidence in their support and the inferences to be drawn therefrom, we consider it useful to state the principles underlying this branch of the law.
the service rules which are statutory vest the power to pass the impugned orders on the govern- ment.
the expression government in the context is the functionary within the state who is vested with executive power in the relevant field.
of course, the constitution vests the executive power in a state in the governor but he is constitutionally directed to act on the aid and advice of his ministers.
in the case before us it is common ground that it was the chief minister who was incharge of the health department in which the appellant was employed and it was therefore the chief minister as the minister in-charge of that portfolio who initiated these proceedings though the formal orders of the ministry were issued by the secretaries etc. of the department in the name of the governor.
for the purposes of the present controversy the functionary who took action and on whose instructions the action was taken against the appellant was undoubtedly the chief minister and if that functionary was actuated by mala fides in taking that action it is clear that such action would be vitiated.
in this context it is necessary to add that though the learned attorney-general at first hinted that he would raise a legal contention, that even if mala fides were established against the chief minister still the impugned orders could not be set aside, he did not further pursue the matter, but proceeded, if we may say so rightly, to persuade us that mala fides was not made out by the evidence on record.
such an argument, if right, would mean that even fraud or corruption, leaving aside mala fides, would not be examinable by a court and would not vitiate administrative orders.
as lord denning said in lazarus estates, limited v. beasley 1  no judgment of a court, no order of a minister, can be allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud.
in the circumstances we do not consider it necessary to deal with this aspect more fully or in greater detail.
if this were put aside, the second ground of attack on the orders may be viewed from two related aspects--of ultra vires  1 1956 1.
all e.r. 341, 345.
pure and simple and secondly as an infraction of the rule that every power vested in a public body or authority has to be used honestly, bona fide and reasonably, though the two often slide into each other.
thus sir lyman duff, speaking in municipal council of sydney v. campbell 1  in the context of an allegation that the statutory power vested in a municipal corporation to acquire property had been used in bad faith which was held to have been proved stated a body such as the municipal council of sydney, authorised to take land compulsorily for specified purposes, will not be permitted to exercise its powers for different purposes, and if it attempts to do so, the courts will interfere.
as lord loreburn said, in marquess of clanricarde v. congested districts board  79 j.p. 481  whether it does so or not is a question of fact.
where the proceedings of the council are attacked upon this ground, the party impeaching those proceedings must, of course, prove that the council, though professing to exercise its powers for the statutory purpose, is in fact employing them in furtherance of some ulterior object.
similarly, in short v. poole corporation   pollock m. r. observed the appellants  represented before the court by maugham k. c.-afterwards lord maugham  do not contest the proposition that where an authority is constituted under statute to carry out statutory powers with which it is entrusted, . . .
if an attempt is made to exercise those powers corruptly-as under the influence of bribery, or mala fide-for some improper purpose, such an attempt must fail.
it is null and void see reg.
v. governors of darlington school  6 q.b.
682, 715 .
in, the same case warrington, l.t., said no public body can be regarded as having statutory authority to act in bad faith or from corrupt motives and any action purporting to be that of the body, but proved to be committed in bad faith or from corrupt  1  1925 a.c. 338.  2  1926 1 ch.
66, 85.
motives, would certainly be held to be inoperative.
it may be also possible to prove that an act of the public body, though performed in good faith and without the taint of corruption, was so clearly founded on alien and irrelevant grounds as to be outside the authority conferred upon the body, and therefore inoperative.
it is difficult to suggest any act which would be held ultra vires under this head, though performed bona fide,  vide pages 90-91 .
it was really the first aspect of ultra vires that was stressed by lord parker when in vatcher v. paull 1  at page 378 of the report he spoke of a power exercised for a purpose or with an intention beyond the scope of or not justified by the instrument creating the power.
in legal parlance it would be a case of a fraud on a power, though no corrupt motive or bargain is imputed.
in this sense, if it could be shown that an authority exercising a power has taken into account-it may even be bona fide and with the best of intentions,--as a relevant factor something which it could not properly take into account, in deciding whether or not to exercise the power or the manner or extent to which it should be exercised, the exercise of the power would be bad.
sometimes courts are confronted with cases where the purposes sought to be achieved are mixed,-some relevant and some alien to the purpose.
the courts have, on occasions, resolved the difficulty by finding out the dominant purpose which impelled the action, and where the power itself is conditioned by a purpose, have proceeded to invalidate the exercise of the power when any irrelevant purpose is proved to have entered the mind of the authority  see sadler v. sheffield corporation 2  as also lord dennings observation earl fitzwilliam etc.
v. minister of t. c. planning 3 .
this is on the principle that if in such a situation the dominant purpose is unlawful then the act itself is unlawful and it is not cured by saying that they had another purpose which was lawful.
as we said earlier, the two grounds of ultra vires and mala fides are thus most often inextricably mixed.
treat-  1  1915 a.c. 372.   2  1924 1 ch.
483.   3  1951 2 k.b. 284, 307.
ing it as a question of ultra vires, the question is what is the nature of the power?
has it been granted to achieve a definite object?-in which case it would be conditioned by the purpose for which it is vested.
taking the present case of the power vested in government to pass the impugned orders, it could not be doubted that it is vested in government for accomplishing a defined public purpose viz., to ensure probity and purity in the public services by enabling disciplinary penal action against the members of the service suspected to be guilty of misconduct.
the nature of the power thus discloses its purpose.
in that context the use of that power for achieving analien purpose-wreaking the ministers vengeance on theofficer would be mala fide and a colourable exercise ofthat power, and would therefore be struck down by thecourts.
in this connection we might cite a dictum of lord lindley in general assembly of free church etc.v.
overtoun 1  when the learned lord said at page 695 i take it to be clear that there is a condition implied in this as well as in other instruments which create powers, namely, that the power shall be used bona fide for the purposes for which they are conferred.
doubtless, he who seeks to invalidate or nullify any act or order must establish the charge of bad faith, an abuse or a misuse by government of its powers.
while the indirect motive or purpose, or bad faith or personal ill-will is not to be held established except on clear proof thereof, it is obviously difficult to establish the state of a mans mind, for that is what the appellant has to establish in this case, though this may sometimes be done  see edgington v. fitzmaurice 2  .
the difficulty is not lessened when one has to establish that a person in the position of a minister apparently acting on the legitimate exercise of power has, in fact, been acting mala fide in the sense of pursuing an illegitimate aim.
we must, however, demur to the suggestion that mala fide in the sense of improper motive should be established only by direct evidence that is that it must be discernible from the order impugned or must be shown from the notings in  1  1904 a.c. 515, 695.   2  1885 29 c.d.
459.
the file which preceded the order.
if bad faith would vitiate the order, the same can, in our opinion, be deduced as a reasonable and inescapable inference from proved facts.
pausing here, we might summarise the position by stating that the court is not an appellate forum where the correctness of an order of government could be canvassed and, indeed,.
it has no jurisdiction to substitute its own view as to the necessity or desirability of initiating disciplinary proceedings, for the entirety of the power, jurisdiction and discretion in that regard is vested by law in the government.
the only question which could be considered by the court is whether the authority vested with the power has paid attention to or taken into account circumstances, events or matters wholly extraneous to the purpose for which the power was vested, or whether the proceedings have been initiated mala fide for satisfying a private or personal grudge of the authority against the officer.
ifthe act is in excess of the power granted or is an abuseor misuse of power, the matter is capable of interferenceand rectification by the court.
in such an event the fact that the authority concerned denies the charge of mala fides, or asserts the absence of oblique mo- tives or of its having taken into consideration improper or irrelevant matter does not preclude the court from enquiring into the truth of the allegations made against the authority and affording appropriate reliefs to the party aggrieved by such illegality or abuse of power in the event of the allegations being made out.
before entering on a discussion of the question whether the appellant has established that the action of government was vitiated by mala fides, we consider it pertinent to make a few preliminary observation.
in considering the evidence we have kept in view the high position which the chief minister holds in the state and are conscious of the fact that charges of a personal nature made against such a dignitary are not to be lightly accepted.
we have also borne in mind that charges of personal hostility are easily and very often made by persons who are subjected to penal or quasi penal proceedings against those who initiate them, and have therefore made full allowance for these factors, and we have examined and weighed the evidence with anxious care.
we would only add that the fact that two of our brethren feel differently on this matter has heightened our responsibility and in the care to be bestowed in appreciating the evidence.
the constitution enshrines and guarantees the rule of law and art.
226 is designed to ensure that each and every authority in the state, including the government, acts bona fide and within the limits of its power and we consider that when a court is satisfied that there is an abuse or misuse of power and its jurisdiction is invoked, it is incumbent on the court to afford justice to the individual.
it is with these considerations in mind that we approach the facts of this case.
the allegations in the writ petition filed by the appellant on this matter may be summarised as follows  1  the appellant was requested by the chief minister to perform an operation on his son--surinder singh-in april 1960.
the operation was performed.
the chief minister desired that after the operation his son should stay under the care of the appellant at jullundur during his convalescence.
surinder, however, left the appellants place and the chief minister became angry for the supposed negligence of the appellant in permitting this to happen.   2  the chief minister himself and the members of his family made several requests to the appellant to show undue favours to certain patients who were recommended to the appellant.
these were complied with, but when subsequently the appellant refused to comply with further requests the chief minister turned hostile.   3  the chief ministers wife had been asking for medicines to be sent to her by the appellant for the use of herself, and her relations from the hospital stores of jullundur.
the appellant, however, sent her the medicines, though not from the hospital but buying them himself in the market.
the chief ministers wife also wanted some expensive articles like singer sewing machines etc. to be sent to her gratis.
this the ap- pellant did but the refusal to comply with fur- ther demands of the same type angered the chief minister.   4  one kirpa singh was working as the manager of an automobile concern known as national motors, jullundur which was either directly or indirectly owned by surinder-the son of the chief minister.
the appellant at the instance of the chief minister accommodated kirpa singh in his own house and besides provided him with board.
this went on for about 7 months but in or about april, 1960 the appellant desired kirpa singh to look out for a lodging and board elsewhere and the latter had to do so.
this was a further cause of irritation and anger for the chief minister.   5  several matters recited above were in april 1960 or thereabouts and as a result of the hostility developed by reason of these the appellant was accused, in september 1960, of showing undue favours to akali prisoners who were lodged at the district jail at jullundur.
this allegation was false and was later not pressed.   6  the chief minister desired to have the help of the appellant as an expert to instruct the police officers who were conducting the prosecution in what is known as the karnal murder case.
the appellant had given some sort of assurance to the chief minister that the prosecution would succeed.
it failed before the sessions judge and subsequently the appeal by the state was dismissed by the high court of punjab and finally an application for special leave was dismissed by this court.
the chief minister became very angry with the appellant because the assurance given to him that the prosecution would succeed had been belied and the chief minister felt chagrined at the result.   7  one dr. dhillon who was a junior medical officer in the punjab medical service accompanied the chief minister as a medical attendant in 1956-57.
under the rules the chief minister was not entitled to this type of medical attention.
there was some dispute as regards the salary payable to dr. dhillon during the period when he was with the chief minister.
the appellant was requested to give a false certificate regarding the services of dr. dhillon.
the chief minister complained that though several years had passed, dhillons salary for the 45 days that he had been with the chief minister had not yet been paid to him.
the appellant refused to comply this demand and this was a further source of irritation and hostility.
the appellants further case is that as a result of these incidents or sources of irritation and displeasure of the chief minister, the chief minister was thinking of taking some steps against him and that he got a complaint against him on october 29, 1960 which he sent up for investigation.
the charge then made against the appellant was that on july 5, 1960 he had refused to examine a woman-patient who had come to the hospital with an out-door chit and that the husband of the woman was forced to pay a sum of rs. 16.00 for her examination at his residence.
on the excuse that this complaint had been made, the appellant was transferred from jullundur to amritsar by an order dated december 6, 1960.
it was stated by the appellant that in the state officers were usually transferred only during the months march or april, so that the education of their children etc. might not be interrupted by the change of station, but that his transfer in december was therefore out of the ordinary and done with a view to inconvenience and humiliate him and deprive him of his practice at jullundur.
the appellant thus having realised the hostility of the chief minister and not desiring to continue much longer in service, made an application for leave preparatory to retirement.
he was reaching the age of 55 on june 15, 1961 and he applied for leave until that period.
his leave was sanctioned with effect from december 18, 1960 and this was gazetted on january 27, 1961.
it is this leave that was revoked by the impugned orders on june 3, 1961 and under these the ap- pellant was placed under suspension and an inquiry was started later in the matter.
between these two dates i.e. between december 1960 and june 1961, however, some events happened which 48-2 s. c. india/64 are set out in the petition require to be stated.
it would be seen that when the leave preparatory to retirement which was applied for was sanctioned, the government had already with them the complaint made on october 29, 1960 relating to the charge that the appellant had improperly demanded a sum of rs. 16.00 from a patient desiring treatment at the jullundur hospital.
that related to an incident of july 1960 and was apparently not thought to be serious enough to justify the refusal of the leave applied for.
but after the leave was sanctioned, in the issue of the weekly newspaper blitz dated the 15th january, 1961 there appeared an article in which allegations were made against the chief minister.
several of the allegations were those which we have mentioned earlier as having been made by the appellant in his petition and stated to be the reasons for the hostility of the chief minister.
the appellant however was not named as such in the article.
it must however have been apparent to those acquainted with the matter that it was the appellant from whom these favours were sought or obtained by the chief minister.
it is the case of the appellant that the chief minister who was in delhi at that time must have been apprised of the contents of the article even on january 13, 1961 and this does not seem improbable because it is common knowledge that copies of this weekly are available in delhi even two days before the date it bears.
in the absence of any affidavit from the chief minister, and there is none on the record, it is not possible to say whether the article in the weekly was or was not seen by him on the 13th.
on that day-january 13, 1961, however, the inspector  vigilance , jullundur addressed a communication to the appellant enquiring whether the appellant who had by then gone to kanpur  it is to he remembered he was then on leave  would come to jullundur for clarifying certain points in relation to an inquiry which had been ordered by the punjab government.
it is stated that this was in connection with the complaint regarding the improper receipt of rs. 16.00 from a patient who had come to the hospital for treatment in july 1960.
the vigilance inspector made some inquiries of the appellant and examined the records at the hospital in february, 1961.
on march 18, 1961 the appellants wife wrote a letter to the blitz confirming the allegations against the chief minister which had already appeared in that paper in its issue of january 15, 1961 and in the same month-march 1961 the appellants wife circulated members of parliament and others with the details ofthe allegations found in the newspaper.
it is the case ofthe appellant that these matters occasioned the hostility of the chief minister and that the impugned orders passedin june 1961 were passed not bona fide for the purposeof conducting an inquiry into his conduct but to harassand humiliate him and thus wreak vengeance on him for the part that he played in bringing down the reputation of the chief minister by the disclosures.
as we observed earlier, if the appellant is able to establish that the main object and purpose of the initiation of the inquiry was not in the interest of the service or to ascertain any misconduct on the part of the appellant, but that the dominant motive and purpose was the harassment and humiliation of the appellant for his refusal to yield to the demands of the chief minister or the members of his family at some stages, and in defaming him openly at the later stage, it would clearly be a case of mala fides and the impugned orders have to be set aside.
we shall first take up for consideration the several allegations that have been made and see whether they had been satisfactorily made out.
before proceeding further it is necessary to state that allegations of a personal cha- racter having been made against the chief minister, there could only be two ways in which they could be repelled.
first, if the allegations were wholly irrelevant, and even if true, would not afford a basis upon which the appellant would be entitled to any relief, they need not have been answered and the appellant could derive no benefit from the respondents not answering them.
we have already dealt with this matter and have made it clear that if they were true and made out by acceptable evidence, they could not be ignored as irrelevant  2  if they were relevant, in the absence of their intrinsic improbability the allegations could be countered by documentary or affidavit evidance which would show their falsity.
in the absence of such evidence they could be disproved only by the party against whom the allegations were made denying the same on oath.
in the present case there were serious al- legations made against the chief minister and there were several matters of which he alone could have personal knowledge and therefore which he alone could deny, but what was, however, placed before the court in answer to the charges made against the chief minister was an affidavit by the secretary to government in the medical department who could only speak from official records and obviously not from personal knowledge about the several matters which were alleged against the -chief minister.
in these circumstances we do not think it would be proper to brush aside the allegations made by the appellant particularly in respect of those matters where they are supported by some evidence of a documentary nature seeing that there is no contradiction by those persons who alone could have contradicted them.
in making this observation we have in mind the chief minister as well as mrs. kairon against whom allegations have been made but who have not chosen to state on oath the true facts according to them.
before passing on to a consideration of the details of the several allegations there is one matter to which we ought to make reference at this stage and that is the admissibility and evidentiary value of the tape-recorded talks which have been produced as part of his supporting evidence by the appellant.
the learned judges of the high court without saying in so many terms that these were inadmissible in evidence, this being the contention raised by the respondent-state, have practically put them out of consideration for the reason that tape-recordings were capable of being tampered with.
with respect we cannot agree.
there are few documents and possibly no piece of evidence which could not be tampered with, but that would certainly not be a ground on which courts could reject evidence as inadmissible or refuse to consider it.
it was not contended before us the tape-recordings were inadmissible.
in the ultimate analysis the factor mentioned would have a bearing only on the weight to be attached to the evidence and not on its admissibility.
doubtless, if in any particular case there is a well-grounded suspicion, not even say proof, that a tape-recording has been tampered with, that would be a good ground for the court to discount wholly its evidentiary value.
but in the present case we do not see any basis for any such suggestion.
the tape-recordings were referred to by the appellant in his writ petition as part of the evidence on which he proposed to rely in support of his assertions as regards the substance of what passed between him and the chief minister and the members of the latters family on the several matters which wece the subject of allegations in th