--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal original jurisdiction writ petition  criminal  number 156 of 2016 mahender chawla ors.
petitioner s  versus union of india ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondent s  judgment a.k. sikri, j. the instant writ petition filed by the petitioners under article 32 of the constitution of india raises important issues touching upon the efficacy of the criminal justice system in this country.
in an adversarial system, which is prevalent by india, the court is supposed to decide the cases on the basis of evidence produced before it.
this evidence can be in the form of documents.
it can be oral evidence as well, i.e., the deposition of witnesses.
the signature not verified witnesses, thus, play a vital role in facilitating the court to arrive at digitally signed by sushil kumar rakheja date 2018.12.05 correct findings on disputed questions of facts and to find out 161052 ist reason where the truth lies.
they are, therefore, backbone in decision making process.
whenever, in a dispute, the two sides come out with conflicting version, the witnesses become important tool to arrive at right conclusions, thereby advancing justice in a matter.
this principle applies with more vigor and strength in criminal cases inasmuch as most of such cases are decided on the basis of testimonies of the witnesses, particularly, eye-witnesses, who may have seen actual occurrence crime.
it is for this reason that bentham stated more than 150 years ago that witnesses are eyes and ears of justice.
2  thus, witnesses are important players in the judicial system, who help the judges in arriving at correct factual findings.
the instrument of evidence is the medium through which facts, either disputed or required to be proved, are effectively conveyed to the courts.
this evidence in the form of documentary and oral is given by the witnesses.
a witness may be a partisan or interested witness, i.e., a witness who is in a near relation with the victim of crime or is concerned with conviction of the accused person.
even his testimony is relevant, though, stricter scrutiny is required while adjudging the credence of such a victim.
however, apart from these witnesses or the witnesses who may themselves be the victims, other witnesses may not have any personal interest in the outcome of a case.
they still help the judicial system.
in the words of whittaker chambers, a witness is a man whose life and faith are so completely one that when the challenge comes to step out and testify for his faith, he does so, disregarding all risks, accepting all consequences 1. 3  the importance of the witness, particularly in a criminal trial is highlighted in a book in the following manner in search of truth, he plays that sacred role of the sun, which eliminates the darkness of ignorance and illuminates the face of justice, encircled by devils of humanity and compassion.
xxx xxx xxx the value of witnesses cant be denied, keeping in view the dependency of the criminal proceedings on the testimonies and cooperation of witnesses in all the stages of the proceedings, especially in those cases where the prosecution has to establish the guilt with absolute certainty via oral cross-examination of witnesses in hearings open to the world at large.
in such cases, the testimony of a witness, even if not as an eye witness, may prove to be crucial in determining the circumstances in which the crime might have been committed 2 notwithstanding the same, the conditions of witnesses in indian legal system can be termed as pathetic.
there are many threats faced by the witnesses at various stages of an investigation and then during the trial of a case.
apart from facing 1 whittaker chambers, witness quotes  january 7, 2014, 10.30 am , http www.brainyquote.com quotes keywords witness.
2 witness protection in criminal trial in india by girish abhyankar asawari abhyankar life threatening intimidation to himself and to his relatives, he may have to face the trauma of attending the court regularly.
because of the lack of witness protection programme in india and the treatment that is meted out to them, there is a tendency of reluctance in coming forward and making statement during the investigation and or testify in courts.
these witnesses neither have any legal remedy nor do they get suitably treated.
the present legal system takes witnesses completely for granted.
they are summoned to court regardless of their financial and personal conditions.
many times they are made to appear long after the incident of the alleged crime, which significantly hampers their ability to recall necessary details at the time of actual crime.
they are not even suitably remunerated for the loss of time and the expenditure towards conveyance etc. 4  in swaran singh vs. state of punjab3, this court speaking through wadhwa, j. expressed view on conditions of witnesses by stating that the witnesses are harassed a lot.
they come from distant places and see the case is adjourned.
they have to attend the court many times on their own.
it has become routine that case is adjourned till the witness is tired and will stop coming to court.
in this process lawyers also play an important role.
sometimes witness is threatened, maimed, or even bribed.
there is no 3  2000  5 scc 68 at 678.
protection to the witnesses.
by adjourning the case the court also becomes a party to such miscarriage of justice.
the witness is not given respect by the court.
they are pulled out of the court room by the peon.
after waiting for the whole day he sees the matter being adjourned.
there is no proper place for him to sit and drink a glass of water.
when he appears, he is subjected to prolong stretched examinations and cross examinations.
for these reasons persons avoid becoming a witness and because of this administration of justice are hampered.
the witnesses are not paid money within time.
the high courts must be vigilant in these matters and should avoid harassment in these matters by subordinate staff.
the witnesses should be paid immediately irrespective of the fact whether he examines or the matter is adjourned.
the time has come now that all courts should be linked with each other through computer.
the bar council of india has to play important role in this process to put the criminal justice system on track.
though the trial judge is aware that witness is telling lie still he is not ready to file complaint against such witness because he is required to sign the same.
there is need to amend section 340 3  b  of cr.p.c.
5  it hardly needs to be emphasised that one of the main reasons for witnesses to turn hostile is that they are not accorded appropriate protection by the state.
it is a harsh reality, particularly, in those cases where the accused persons criminals are tried for heinous offences, or where the accused persons are influential persons or in a dominating position that they make attempts to terrorize or intimidate the witnesses because of which these witnesses either avoid coming to courts or refrain from deposing truthfully.
this unfortunate situation prevails because of the reason that the state has not undertaken any protective measure to ensure the safety of these witnesses, commonly known as witness protection.
6  over the last many years criminal justice system in this country has been witness to traumatic experience where witnesses turn hostile.
this has been happening very frequently.
there may be many causes for this sordid phenomena.
7  in ramesh and others vs. state of haryana4, this court had indicated some of the reasons which make witnesses turn hostile, as can be discerned from the following discussion.
40.
in some of the judgments in past few years, this court has commented upon such peculiar behaviour of witnesses turning hostile and we would like to quote from few such judgments.
in krishna mochi v. state of bihar krishna mochi v. state of bihar,  2002  6 scc 81 2002 scc  cri  1220 , this court observed as under  scc p. 104, para 31  31.
it is a matter of common experience that in recent times there has been a sharp decline of ethical values in public life even in developed countries much less developing one, like ours, where the ratio of decline is higher.
even in ordinary cases, witnesses are not inclined to depose or their evidence is not found to be credible by courts for manifold reasons.
one of the reasons may be that they do not have courage to depose against an accused because of threats to their life, more so when the offenders are habitual criminals or high-ups in the government or close to powers, which may be political, economic or other powers including muscle power.
4  2017  1 scc 529 41.
likewise, in zahira habibullah sheikh  5  v. state of gujarat zahira habibullah sheikh  5  v. state of gujarat,  2006  3 scc 374  2006  2 scc  cri  8 , this court highlighted the problem with the following observations  scc pp.
396-98, paras 40-41  40.
witnesses as bentham said are the eyes and ears of justice.
hence, the importance and primacy of the quality of trial process.
if the witness himself is incapacitated from acting as eyes and ears of justice, the trial gets putrefied and paralysed, and it no longer can constitute a fair trial.
the incapacitation may be due to several factors, like the witness being not in a position for reasons beyond control to speak the truth in the court or due to negligence or ignorance or some corrupt collusion.
time has become ripe to act on account of numerous experiences faced by the court on account of frequent turning of witnesses as hostile, either due to threats, coercion, lures and monetary considerations at the instance of those in power, their henchmen and hirelings, political clouts and patronage and innumerable other corrupt practices ingeniously adopted to smother and stifle truth and realities coming out to surface.
broader public and societal interests require that the victims of the crime who are not ordinarily parties to prosecution and the interests of the state represented by their prosecuting agencies do not suffer.
there comes the need for protecting the witness.
time has come when serious and undiluted thoughts are to be bestowed for protecting witnesses so that the ultimate truth presented before the court and justice triumphs and that the trial is not reduced to a mockery.
41.
the state has a definite role to play in protecting the witnesses, to start with at least in sensitive cases involving those in power, who have political patronage and could wield muscle and money power, to avert trial getting tainted and derailed and truth becoming a casualty.
as a protector of its citizens it has to ensure that during a trial in court the witness could safely depose the truth without any fear of being haunted by those against whom he had deposed.
every state has a constitutional obligation and duty to protect the life and liberty of its citizens.
that is the fundamental requirement for observance of the rule of law.
there cannot be any deviation from this requirement because of any extraneous factors like caste, creed, religion, political belief or ideology.
every state is supposed to know these fundamental requirements and this needs no retaliation  sic repetition .
we can only say this with regard to the criticism levelled against the state of gujarat.
some legislative enactments like the terrorist and disruptive activities  prevention  act, 1987  in short the tada act  have taken note of the reluctance shown by witnesses to depose against people with muscle power, money power or political power which has become the order of the day.
if ultimately truth is to be arrived at, the eyes and ears of justice have to be protected so that the interests of justice do not get incapacitated in the sense of making the proceedings before the courts mere mock trials as are usually seen in movies.
42.
likewise, in sakshi v. union of india sakshi v. union of india,  2004  5 scc 518 2004 scc  cri  1645 , the menace of witnesses turning hostile was again described in the following words  scc pp.
544-45, para 32  32.
the mere sight of the accused may induce an element of extreme fear in the mind of the victim or the witnesses or can put them in a state of shock.
in such a situation he or she may not be able to give full details of the incident which may result in miscarriage of justice.
therefore, a screen or some such arrangement can be made where the victim or witnesses do not have to undergo the trauma of seeing the body or the face of the accused.
often the questions put in cross- examination are purposely designed to embarrass or confuse the victims of rape and child abuse.
the object is that out of the feeling of shame or embarrassment, the victim may not speak out or give details of certain acts committed by the accused.
it will, therefore, be better if the questions to be put by the accused in cross-examination are given in writing to the presiding officer of the court, who may put the same to the victim or witnesses in a language which is not embarrassing.
there can hardly be any objection to the other suggestion given by the petitioner that whenever a child or victim of rape is required to give testimony, sufficient breaks should be given as and when required.
the provisions of sub-section  2  of section 327 crpc should also apply in inquiry or trial of offences under sections 354 and 377 ipc.
43.
in state v. sanjeev nanda state v. sanjeev nanda,  2012  8 scc 450  2012  4 scc  civ  487  2012  3 scc  civ  899 , the court felt constrained in reiterating the growing disturbing trend  scc pp.
486-87, paras 99- 101  99.
witness turning hostile is a major disturbing factor faced by the criminal courts in india.
reasons are many for the witnesses turning hostile, but of late, we see, especially in high profile cases, there is a regularity in the witnesses turning hostile, either due to monetary consideration or by other tempting offers which undermine the entire criminal justice system and people carry the impression that the mighty and powerful can always get away from the clutches of law, thereby eroding peoples faith in the system.
100.
this court in state of u.p. v. ramesh prasad misra state of u.p. v. ramesh prasad misra,  1996  10 scc 360 1996 scc  cri  1278 held that it is equally settled law that the evidence of a hostile witness could not be totally rejected, if spoken in favour of the prosecution or the accused, but it can be subjected to closest scrutiny and that portion of the evidence which is consistent with the case of the prosecution or defence may be accepted.
in k. anbazhaganv.
supt.
of police k. anbazhagan v. supt.
of police,  2004  3 scc 767 2004 scc  cri  882 , this court held that if a court finds that in the process the credit of the witness has not been completely shaken, he may after reading and considering the evidence of the witness as a whole, with due caution, accept, in the light of the evidence on the record that part of his testimony which it finds to be creditworthy and act upon it.
this is exactly what was done in the instant case by both the trial court and the high court sanjeev nanda v. state, 2009 scc online del 2039  2009   160 dlt 775 and they found the accused guilty.
101.
we cannot, however, close our eyes to the disturbing fact in the instant case where even the injured witness, who was present on the spot, turned hostile.
this court in manu sharma v. state  nct of delhi  manu sharma v. state  nct of delhi ,  2010  6 scc 1  2010  2 scc  cri  1385 and in zahira habibullah sheikh  5  v. state of gujarat zahira habibullah sheikh  5  v. state of gujarat,  2006  3 scc 374  2006  2 scc  cri  8 had highlighted the glaring defects in the system like non-recording of the statements correctly by the police and the retraction of the statements by the prosecution witness due to intimidation, inducement and other methods of manipulation.
courts, however, cannot shut their eyes to the reality.
if a witness becomes hostile to subvert the judicial process, the court shall not stand as a mute spectator and every effort should be made to bring home the truth.
criminal judicial system cannot be overturned by those gullible witnesses who act under pressure, inducement or intimidation.
further, section 193 ipc imposes punishment for giving false evidence but is seldom invoked.
44.
on the analysis of various cases, the following reasons can be discerned which make witnesses retracting their statements before the court and turning hostile  i  threat intimidation.   ii  inducement by various means.   iii  use of muscle and money power by the accused.   iv  use of stock witnesses.   v  protracted trials.   vi  hassles faced by the witnesses during investigation and trial.   vii  non-existence of any clear-cut legislation to check hostility of witness.
45. threat and intimidation has been one of the major causes for the hostility of witnesses.
bentham said witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice.
when the witnesses are not able to depose correctly in the court of law, it results in low rate of conviction and many times even hardened criminals escape the conviction.
it shakes public confidence in the criminal justice delivery system.
it is for this reason there has been a lot of discussion on witness protection and from various quarters demand is made for the state to play a definite role in coming out with witness protection programme, at least in sensitive cases involving those in power, who have political patronage and could wield muscle and money power, to avert trial getting tainted and derailed and truth becoming a casualty.
a stern and emphatic message to this effect was given in zahira habibullah case zahira habibullah sheikh  5  v. state of gujarat,  2006  3 scc 374  2006  2 scc  cri  8 as well.
46.
justifying the measures to be taken for witness protection to enable the witnesses to depose truthfully and without fear, justice malimath committee report on reforms of criminal justice system, 2003 has remarked as under 11.3.
another major problem is about safety of witnesses and their family members who face danger at different stages.
they are often threatened and the seriousness of the threat depends upon the type of the case and the background of the accused and his family.
many times crucial witnesses are threatened or injured prior to their testifying in the court.
if the witness is still not amenable he may even be murdered.
in such situations the witness will not come forward to give evidence unless he is assured of protection or is guaranteed anonymity of some form of physical disguise.
time has come for a comprehensive law being enacted for protection of the witness and members of his family.
47.
almost to similar effect are the observations of the law commission of india in its 198th report report on witness identity protection and witness protection programmes.
, as can be seen from the following discussion therein the reason is not far to seek.
in the case of victims of terrorism and sexual offences against women and juveniles, we are dealing with a section of society consisting of very vulnerable people, be they victims or witnesses.
the victims and witnesses are under fear of or danger to their lives or lives of their relations or to their property.
it is obvious that in the case of serious offences under the indian penal code, 1860 and other special enactments, some of which we have referred to above, there are bound to be absolutely similar situations for victims and witnesses.
while in the case of certain offences under special statutes such fear or danger to victims and witnesses may be more common and pronounced, in the case of victims and witnesses involved or concerned with some serious offences, fear may be no less important.
obviously, if the trial in the case of special offences is to be fair both to the accused as well as to the victims witnesses, then there is no reason as to why it should not be equally fair in the case of other general offences of serious nature falling under the indian penal code, 1860.
it is the fear or danger or rather the likelihood thereof that is common to both cases.
that is why several general statutes in other countries provide for victim and witness protection.
8  all this has created problems of low convictions in india.
this has serious repercussions on the criminal justice system itself.
criminal justice is closely associated with human rights.
whereas, on the one hand, it is to be ensured that no innocent person is convicted and thereby deprived of his liberty, it is of equal importance to ensure, on the other hand, that victims of crime get justice by punishing the offender.
in this whole process, protection of witnesses assumes significance to enable them to depose fearlessly and truthfully.
that would also ensure fair trial as well, which is another concomitant of the rule of law.
9  since this case relates to the issue of protection of witnesses, we are eschewing any further discussion on other miseries faced by the witnesses, though we emphasise the need for addressing other problems as well, at appropriate level, if the criminal justice system in this country is to succeed.
adverting to the importance of witness protection, we may mention that it has been highlighted and emphasised by the courts in india, including this court, time and again.
issues of identity protection of identity of witnesses and witness protection programme have been raised in number of judgments like nhrc vs. state of gujarat5, peoples union for civil liberties  pucl  vs. union of india 6, zahira vs. state of gujarat7, sakshi vs. union of india 8 and zahira habibulla sheikh vs. gujarat9.
10  in peoples union for civil liberties, wherein constitutionality some of the provisions of the prevention of terrorism act  pota , 2002, were challenged, the court carefully analyzed section 30 of the act, which had mentioned about the protection of witnesses.
this provision provides for the proceedings to be held in camera in order to keep the identity of witness confidential.
the court felt the reality that very often witnesses do not come forward to testify before court in serious crimes.
witnesses are not ready to give evidence mainly because their lives might be in danger.
in the courts view, section 30 of the act maintains a balance between the rights of a witness, the rights of an accused and the interest of the public.
however, secrecy of the witness is an exception and not a rule under this section.
11  the protection of a child witness, who may also be a victim, 5 2003  9  scale 329 6 2003  10  scale 967 7  2004  4 scc 158 8  2004  5 scc 518 9 2006  3  scale 967 becomes all the more important.
in sakshi vs. union of india10, the court stressed that there is a dire need to come up with a legislation for the protection of witnesses.
the court also had issued certain guidelines on the procedure of taking of evidence from a child witness.
the court also pointed out the need for special protection to a victim of sexual abuse at the time of recording her statement in court.
the petitioner in that case had given certain suggestions for effectively dealing with the special provisions for testimony in child sexual abuse cases, which were as follows a  the judges shall allow the use of a videotaped interview of the testimony of the child in the presence of a child-support person.
b  a child could be permitted to testify through closed circuit television or from behind a screen to acquire an honest and frank account of the acts complained of without any fear.
c  only the judge should be allowed to cross-examine a minor on the basis of the questions given by the defence in writing after the examination of the minor.
d  during the testimony of the child, sufficient interval should be provided as and when she requires it.
10  2004  5 scc 518 12  in some other judgments, this court gave some more guidelines, in the following manner a  sections 354 and 377 of the indian penal code should be tried and inquired on the same principles mentioned under sub- section  2  of section 327 cr.p.c.
b  while holding the trial of rape or child sex abuse, some sort of arrangements like a screen or something like it may be used so as to make sure that victim or witnesses  who are equally vulnerable and need protection like the victim  do not confront the accused c  questions raised during the cross-examination by the counsel of the accused that are directly related to and be reminiscent to the victim or the witnesses of the incident should be written down and given to the presiding officer of the court in advance.
the presiding officer must put forth those questions to the victim or witness in simple and clear language and as far as possible without making her uncomfortable 13  it hardly needs to be emphasised that failure to hear material witness is denial of fair trial.
the practice, however, to give protection to the witnesses is based on ad hocism, i.e., on case to case basis.
the courts have also, in the process, adopted different means to ensure witness protection, which can be stated in brief detail  a  publication of evidence of the witness only during the course of trial and not after naresh shridhar mirajkar and others vs. state of maharashtra and another 1966  3  scr 744  b  re-trial allowed due to apprehension and threat to the life of witness sunil kumar pal vs. phota sheikh and other air 1984 sc 1591  c  necessity of anonymity for victims in cases of rape delhi domestic working womens forum vs. union of india  1995  1 scc 14   d  discouraging the practice of obtaining adjournments in cases when witness is present and accused is absent.
state of u.p. vs. shambhu nath singh  2001  4 scc 667  e  making threatening of witnesses as a ground for cancellation of bail ram govind upadhyay v. sudarshan singh ii  2002  slt 587  f  cross-examination by video conferencing this is one of the innovative methods devised, which is specifically helpful to the victims of sexual crimes, particularly, child witnesses who are victims of crime as well.
14  in the instant case itself the petitioners have approached this court with the allegations that in the trials that are going on against asaram, who is charged with the offence of committing rapes in numerous cases, the witnesses have been frightened with serious consequences in case they depose against asaram.
it is alleged that as many as 10 witnesses have already been attacked and three witnesses have been killed.
15  there are four petitioners in this petition.
these petitioners include a witness, father of a murdered witness, father of the child rape victim and a journalist who escaped a murder attempt by goons of godman asaram and his son naryana sai and still faces death threats by a jailed sharpshooter of asaram and narayan sai.
it is stated that petitioner number 1 mahender chawla miraculously survived a murder attempt on his life for daring to testify against so called godman, asaram bapu and his son narayan sai in horrifying cases of rape of a child and two sisters.
petitioner number 1 also witnessed narayan sai doing tantrik practice on a dead body of a child in an asaram in madhya pradesh, in which till date there has not been any investigation due to the influence of asaram.
petitioner number 2 naresh gupta is the father of a murdered witness, named, akhil gupta.
akhil was killed for daring to be a witness against asaram.
petitioner number 3 karamvir singh is the father of a child, who was raped by asaram.
petitioner number 3s son somvir was threatened by 2 attackers despite having state police security.
the attackers were apprehended and released on bail.
shockingly the same attacker, named narayan pandey, later killed a rape-case prosecution witness kripal singh.
the child rape victims family has been attacked, threatened and lives in constant fear.
it is also alleged that despite being threatened, the uttar pradesh police shockingly withdrew half of their security.
petitioner number 4, narendra yadav is a journalist who survived a murder attempt on his life because he dared to write articles to the dislike of asaram bapu and narayan sai.
he now lives in constant fear of being killed as the uttar pradesh police has given him a solitary security guard for just eight hours a day, leaving him to fend for himself through the remaining 16 hours.
it is also averred that the sharp shooter of asaram, narayan pandey, who is in jail for murdering a witness kripal singh, writes threatening letters to him from inside the jail.
16  the petitioners have prayed for a court monitored sit or a cbi probe.
it is stated by the petitioners that the prevailing feeling of fear amongst witnesses in the country seriously impairs the right of the people of this country to live in a free society governed by rule of law.
the right to testify in courts in a free and fair manner without any pressure and threat whatsoever is under serious attack today.
if one is unable to testify in courts due to threats or other pressures, then it is a clear violation of article 21 of the constitution.
the right to life guaranteed to the people of this country also includes in its fold the right to live in a society, which is free from crime and fear and right of witnesses to testify in courts without fear or pressure.
17  the petitioners had initially impleaded union of india as respondent number 1 and states of haryana, uttar pradesh, rajasthan, gujarat and madhya pradesh as respondent numbers 2 to 6. 18  appreciating the importance and seriousness of the matter, this court issued show cause notices in the petition on november 18, 2016.
after the service of the notice when the matter came up for hearing on march 24, 2017, this court also directed the states of uttar pradesh and haryana to ensure full and proper protection to the petitioners by providing adequate security.
19  when the matter was again listed on august 28, 2017, mr. k.k. venugopal, learned attorney general appeared on behalf of the union of india, along with ms. pinky anand, additional solicitor general.
it was pointed out that since this court was primarily dealing with the issue pertaining to witness protection programme, it would be appropriate that other states are also impleaded inasmuch as the issue had pan india significant and witness protection programme should be available in all the states.
the petitioners were, accordingly, directed to implead other states as well and they be served with the notice of this petition.
this is how the coverage of the petition has been extended to the entire country, encompassing all the states and union territories.
20  the petition was amended and all the states and union territories have been served and are represented through their respective counsel.
when the matter was thereafter taken up for hearing on november 17, 2017 all the respondents were called upon to file their responses indicating as to what steps could be taken to have the witness protection programme in place.
21  mr. venugopal, learned attorney general for india was also requested to give suggestions in the form of a draft scheme.
it is heartening to note that union of india did not take this petition as adversarial and understood the necessity of having such a scheme in the larger public interest.
with this sensitivity in mind, ministry of home affairs have prepared a draft witness protection scheme, 2018 and placed the same on record of this case.
this was noted in the orders dated april 13, 2018 and the state governments as well as union territories, who had already been supplied with the copy of the draft scheme by the ministry itself, were asked to furnish their comments by may 31, 2018 to the ministry of home affairs.
the union government was impressed upon to finalise the scheme after receiving the comments suggestions from the various governments.
order dated april 13, 2018, incorporating the aforesaid aspects, is reproduced below we are informed that the ministry of home affairs has prepared a draft witness protection scheme 2018.
a copy of the said draft scheme is handed over to us in the court today.
vide letter dated 22nd march, 2018, a copy of the said scheme is also provided to all the state governments and the union territories administration requesting them to furnish their comments by 9th april, 2018.
thereafter, again by reminder dated 11th april, 2018 all the state governments and union territories were asked to furnish their comments by 31st may, 2018.
we expect all the state governments as well as the union territories to furnish their comments by the aforesaid stipulated date of 31st may, 2018 to the ministry of home affairs.
after receiving the comments suggestions the draft witness protection scheme 2018 shall be finalized by the government, ministry of home affairs before the next date.
list the matter in t