--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner polestar electronic p  limited vs. respondent addl.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

commissioner, sales tax delhi date of judgment20/02/1978 bench bhagwati, p.n. bench bhagwati, p.n. beg, m. hameedullah  cj  citation 1978 air 897 1978 scr  3  98 1978 scc  1  636 citator info d 1981 sc1055  16  r 1982 sc 149  248  d 1985 sc1041  7,9,10  f 1986 sc2146  10  act interpretation of statutes--plain and natural meaning--construction of a taxing statute--letter of law or spirit of law--construction of provision exposing an assessee to penalty.
bengal finance  sales tax  act, 1947 as applied to union territory of delhi--sections 2 5  5 2  a  ii --to get the benefit of sale for resale or to a manufacturer--whether subsequent sale should be within union territory of delhi.
headnote bengal finance  sales tax  act, 1947 was applied to the union territory of delhi subject to certain modifications by a notification dated 28-4-1951.
every dealer whose gross turnover exceeds the taxable quantum is liable to pay tax on sales effected by him after a specified date and while he is liable to pay tax, he cannot carry on business unless he gets himself registered and possesses a registration certificate.
the tax is leviable on a dealer in respect of his taxable turnover.
to compute taxable turnover of a dealer, certain deductions are required to be made from his gross turnover and one of the deductions is that set out in section 5 2  a  ii .
what is permitted to be deducted under this provision is turnover of sales to a registered dealer of goods of the class or classes specified in his certificate of registration as being intended for resale by him or for use by him as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
the first proviso enacts that the turnover of sales covered by s. 5  2   a   ii  would be deductible only if a declaration duly filled in and signed by the registered dealer to whom the goods are sold and containing the prescribed particulars in prescribed form is furnished by the selling dealer.
the requirement of such declaration as condition of deduction is clearly intended to prevent fraud and promote administrative efficiency.
the second proviso provides that where any goods specified in the certificate of registration are purchased by a registered dealer as being intended for resale by him or for use by him as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale but are utilised by him for any other purpose the price of the goods purchased shall be allowed to be, deducted from the gross turnover of the selling dealer but shall be included in the taxable turnover of the purchasing dealer.
there are broadly two groups in which the appeals and the writ petitions can be divided.
one group consists of appeals where the assessees purchased goods of the class specified in the certificate of registration as being intended for resale by them and furnished to the dealers selling the goods, declarations in the prescribed form stating that the goods were intended for resale kind thereafter resold the goods though not within, the territory of delhi.
the second group consists of appeals where the assessees purchased goods of the class specified in the certificate of registration as being intended for use by there.
as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and furnished to the prescribed particulars in prescribed form is furnished by the selling dealer, the dealers selling the goods declarations in the prescribed form stating that the goods were purchased by them for use as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and thereafter used the goods purchased as raw materials in the manufacture of goods, in some cases outside delhi and in some others inside, but in the after.
sold the goods so manufacturer outside delhi.
the high court of delhi negatived the contention of the assessees that they were not covered by the second proviso to s. 5 2   a   ii .
the high court took the view that for the purposes of s. 5 2  a  ii  and the second proviso, resale of the goods purchased was confined to, resale inside delhi and so also use of the goods purchased is raw materials in the manufacture of goods and 99 sale of manufactured goods were required to be, inside delhi and, therefore, if the assessees resold the goods outside delhi or used them as raw materials in the manufacture outside delhi, or even if the manufacture was inside delhi sold the goods manufactured outside delhi, there was utilisation of the goods by the assessees for a purpose other than that for which they were purchased and hence the second proviso to s. 5 2  a  ii  was attracted and the price of the goods purchased was liable to be included in the taxable turnover of the assessees the question for consideration was whether resale under s. 5  2   a  ii  and the second proviso means,resale any where without any geographical limitation or it is confined only to resale inside delhi.
the revenue contended  1  the words inside the union territory of delhi are not to be found in s. 5  2   a   ii  and the second proviso but they must be read in these provisions as a matter of construction because  a  if resale outside delhi were held to be within the terms of s. 5 2  a  ii  and the second proviso, the union territory of delhi would lose tax altogether in cases where the goods were resold outside delhi.
the intention of the legislature was to recover tax at only one point while the goods were in the stream of trade.   b  the legislature had no legislative competence to tax sale outside delhi.
therefore, resale ,thin the meaning of s. 5 2  a  ii  and the second proviso could not possibly include resale outside delhi.   c  the words by him following upon the word resale in s. 5 2  a  ii  and the second proviso clearly indicated that the resale contemplated under these provisions was resale by the purchasing dealer as a registered dealer and since the concept of registered dealer has relation only to sale inside delhi, the resale must be within the territory of delhi.
allowing the appeals and writ petitions, held 1.
it is a well settled principle of interpretation that a statutory enactment must or ordinarily be construed according to the plain natural meaning of its language and that no words should be added, altered or modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so in order to prevent a provision from being unintelligible absurd unreasonable unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute.
11oa r. v. dakees 1959 2 all e.r. 350, federal steam navigation company ltd v. v. department of trade industry, 1974 2 all e.r. 97, narayanaswani v. pannersalvam ors.
1973 1 scr 172 relied on.
2. addition to or modification of words used in statutory provision is generally not permissible but the court may depart from this rule to avoid a patent absurdity.
there are no words such as inside the union territory of delhi qualifying resale so as to limit it to resale within the territory of delhi.
the legislature could have easily used such words if its intention was to confine resale within the territory of delhi but it omitted to do so.
iiia, b, e attorney general-sillen 1964 2 h c at 526 referred to.
the absence of specific words limiting resale inside the territory of delhi is not without significance and it cannot be made good bya process of judicial construction, for to do so would be to attribute to the legislature and intention which it has not chosen to express and to usurp the legislative function.
it is obvious that resale is subsequent sale after the first and it must, therefore, have the some meaning as sale defined in s. 2 g .
the definition of sale in s. 2 g  is a general definition which does not limit it to a sale inside the territory of delhi.
even a sale outside the territory of delhi is within the coverage of the definition.
section 5 2  a  ii  does not see to impose any tax on resale.
what it does is to provide deduction in respect of 100 sale to a registered dealer.
even under the second proviso, what is taxed is the just sale made by tile, selling dealer and not the resale made by the purchasing dealer.
thus there is no tax sought to be imposed on the resale under section 5 2  a  ii  or the second proviso and the argument of lack of legislative competence has no substance.
it would, be straining the language of the enactment too much to say that the words by him are intended to mean by him as a registered dealer.
112b-d, el g. 113d 3.
the argument of the revenue that the legislature could never have intended that the union territory of delhi should be altogether deprived of tax in cases of this kind is erroneous.
it is not correct that the legislative intent was to exempt the sale.
to the purchasing dealer only in those cases where the union territory of delhi would be able to recover the tax on resale of the goods by the purchasing dealer.
it is now well settled that when the court is construing a statutory enactment the intention of the legislature should be gathered from the language used by it and it is not permissible to the court to speculate about the legislative intent.
114c-d saloman v. saloman company limited 1897 a.c. 22, at 38 and, back-clawson international limited v. papierwerke waldhof- aschaffenburg 1975 1 all e.r. 810 at 814, relied on.
4. section 5 1  a  ii  and the second proviso occur in a taxing statute and it is a well settled rule of interpretation that in construing a taxing statute one must have regard to the strict letter of the law and not merely to the spirit of the statute or the substance of the law.
116a cape brandy syndicate v. inland revenue commissioner 1921 1 k. b. 64 referred to.
5. it would be flying in the face of well settled rules of construction of a taxing statute to read the words inside the union territory of, delhi in section 5 2  a  ii  and the second proviso, when the plain and undoubted effect of the addition of such words would be to expose a purchasing dealer to penalty.
h116e 6.
during the period the department administered the act in west bengal and for few years in delhi, they administered it on the basis that resale was not confined to resale inside the state of west bengal or union territory of delhi.
it is true that the view of the department as to the meaning of a statute which is administered by them is not admissible as an aid to construction, because wrong practice does not make the law, but long acquiescence of the legislature in the interpretation put upon an enactment may be regarded as some sanction and approval of it.
the circumstance that for long years the legislature did not intervene to amend the law by adding words inside the union territory of delhi even though the revenue was continually administering the law on the basis that resale means resale anywhere does throw some light on the intention of the legislature.
the subsequent amendment also throws light on the intention of the legislature.
117a-e, 118a judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 1290 of 1977.   appeal by special leave from the order dated.
the 31-1-1977 of the additional commr. of sales tax new delhi in appeal number 665 of 1976-77 . and civil appeal number 1111 of 1977  appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated the 17-7-1975 of the allahabad high court in c.m.w.p.
number 494 of 1975 .
and civil appeal number 1352 of 1977  appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated the 30th april, 1977 of the sales tax office at new delhi .
and civil appeal number 1110 of 1977 appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated the 22nd march, 1977 of the sales tax officer at new delhi in r.c. no 13754 .
and civil appeal number 1085 of 1977  appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated 30-3-1977 of the sales tax officer, new delhi.  and civil appeal number 236 of 1976  appeals by special leave from the judgment and orders dated the 18th december 1975 of the sales tax officer, ward number 40, delhi for the assessment year 1973-74 in order number 856a .
and civil appeal number 456 of 1976  appeal by the special leave from the judgment and order dated the 16th september, 1975 of the delhi high court in civil writ number 343 of 1975 .
and civil appeal number 816 of 1976  appeal by special leave from the order dated the 30th june 1976 of the addl.
commr.
of sales tax, new delhi in appeal number 8945 of 1975-76 .
and civil appeal number 18 of 1975  appeal by special leave from the assessment order number 2667 dated the 6th september, 1974 of the sales-tax officer, assessing authority, ward number 40, delhi, for the year 1971- 72 .
and civil appeal number 1522 of 1974  from the judgment and order dated the 26th april, 1974 of the delhi high court in civil writ number 1426 of 1973 .
and civil appeal number 1526 of 1974  from the judgment and order dated the 26th april, 1974 of the delhi high court in civil writ number 947 of 1973 .
and writ petitions numbers 166/77 329 of 1975 with slps.
numbers 2522 2524 of 1977 f. s. nariman  in ca 1290, 1085 1352  a. k. sen  in 1111 , s. t. desai  in 1110 , ravinder narain, talat ansari balram saingal  in ca 1290 1 1 1 1 , shri narain  in cas.
1352, 1085 1110  arjun anand for j. b. dadachanji company for the appellants in cas.
numbers 1290, 1111, 1085, 1352, 1110 1526.
shyamala pappu, j. ramamurthi r. vaigai in cas. 236, 456/76 718 of 1975 for the appellants.
sardar bahadur bishnu bahadur saharya for the appellant in ca 1522 of 1974.
yogeshwar prasad, rani arora meera bali for the appellant cas.
numbers 816 in w.p. number 166.
g. s. chatterjee, d. p. mukherjee a. k. ganguli for the petitioners in slps 2522 2524.
k. b. rohatgi m. k. garg for the petitioners in w.p. number 329/75.
s. v. gupte attorney general  in cas.
1290, 1352, 816 ii 10 , r. c. chawla  in 1290 w.p. 166 ca 18/75  r. n. sachthey and a. subhashini for the respondents in c.a. numbers 1290, 1111, 1085,1352, 1110, 236, 456, 816 of 1976, 18 of 1975, 1522 1526/74, w.p. numbers 166, 329 slps.
numbers 2522 2524/77.
the judgment of the court was delivered by bhagwati, j. these appeals raise a short but interesting question of law relating to the interpretation of section 5 2  a  ii  of the bengal finance  sales tax  act, 1941 as applied to the union territory of delhi  hereinafter, for the sake of convenience referred to as delhi .
the act was extended to delhi subject to certain modifications by a notification dated 28th april, 1951 issued by the central government in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2 of the part c states  laws  act, 1950 and it came into force in delhi on 28th may, 1951 by virtue of a notification issued under section 1, sub-section  3  of the act.
there have been several amendments made in the act from time to time since the date of its application to delhi but we are concerned in these appeals only with the assessment periods 1971-72 and 1972-73 and hence we shall confine ourselves to the relevant provisions of the act as they stood during these assessment periods.
section 2 enacted the definition provision and clause  c  of that section defined a dealer to mean any person who carries on the business of selling goods in delhi.
clause  g  of section 2 contained the definition of sale.
it was a definition in general terms and it mad,.
no reference to the situs of the sale.
it did not limit the definition to a sale inside delhi.
there was an explanation to this clause which laid down as to when a sale or purchase shall be deemed to take place inside delhi. section 4, sub-section  1  provided that every dealer whose gross turnover during the year immediately preceding the commencement of the act exceeded the taxable quantum at any time within such year shall be liable to pay tax under the act on all sales effected after the date notified by the chief commissioner and sub-section  2  of that section said that every dealer to whom sub-section  1  does not apply, shall, if his gross turnover calculated from the commencement of any year exceeds the taxable quantum at any time within such year, be liable to pay tax under the act, on the expiry of two months from the date on which such gross turnover first exceeds the taxable quantum, on all sales effected after such expiry.
sub-section  5  of section 4 defined taxable quantum to mean, in relation to any dealer who imports for sale any goods into delhi or manufactures or produces any goods for sale, regardless of, the value of the goods imported, manufactured or produced, ten thousand rupees, and in relation to any other dealer, thirty thousand rupees.
sub-section  1  of section 5 provided different rates of tax, according as the goods fell within one category or another, at which the tax payable by a dealer shall be levied on his taxable turnover.
what is- taxable turnover was defined in subsection  2  of section 5 to mean that part of a dealers gross turnover during any period which remains after deducting therefrom-  a  his turnover during that period on-   i  the sale of goods declared tax-free tinder section 6  ii  sales to a registered dealer-of goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of such dealer, as being intended for resale by him, or for use by him as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and of containers or other materials for the packing of goods of the class or classes so specified for sale provided that in the case of such sales a declaration duly filled up and signed by the registered dealer to whom the goods are sold and containing the prescribed particulars on a prescribed from obtainable from the prescribed authority is furnished in the prescribed manner by the dealer who sells the goods.
provided further that where any goods specified in the certificate of registration are purchased by a registered dealer as being intended for re-sale by him or for use by him as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale, but are utilised by him for any other purpose, the price of the goods purchased shall be allowed to be deducted from the gross turnover of the selling dealer but shall be included in the taxable turnover of the purchasing dealer.   iii  sales to a registered dealer engaged in the business of raising coal, of any goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner to be required directly for use in connection with the raising of coal  iv  sales to any undertaking supplying electrical energy to the public under a licence or sanction granted or deemed to have been granted under the indian electricity act, 1910  ix of 1910  of goods for use by it in the generations distribution of such energy  v  sales of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner to have been dispatched by, or on behalf of dealer to an address outside the  union territory  of delhi  vi  such other sales as may be prescribed this was the definition until 28th may, 1972, when by finance act, 1972 the main enactment in section 5  2   a   ii  was substituted by the following provision  2  in this act the expression taxable turnover means that part of a dealers gross turnover during any period which remains after deducting therefrom-  a  his turnover during that period on-   i  x x x  ii  sales to a registered dealer- of goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of such dealer, as being intended for re-sale by him, or for use by him as raw-materials in the manufacture in the union territory of delhi  hereinafter in this subclause referred to as delhi , of goods  other than goods declared tax free under section 6   a  for sale inside delhi or  b  for sale in the course of inter-state trade or commerce, being a sale occasioning or effected by transfer of documents of title to such goods during the movement of such goods from delhi or  c  for sale in the course of export outside india being a sale occasioning the movement of such goods from delhi, or a sale effected by transfer of documents of title to such goods effected during the movement of such goods from delhi, to a place outside india and after the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of india and of containers or other materials for the packing of goods of the class or classes so specified for sale section 7, sub-section  1  laid down that no dealer shall, while being liable to pay tax under section 4, carry on business as a dealer unless he has been registered and possesses a registration certificate and subsection  3  of that section provided for grant of a certificate of regis- tration to a dealer on an application being made by him under subsection  2  and said that such certificate of registration shall specify the class or classes of goods for the purposes of sub-clause  ii  it clause  a  of sub-section  2  of section 5. section 26 conferred power on the chief commissioner to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the act and in exercise of this power, the delhi sales tax rules, 1951 were made by the, chief commissioner.
these rules prescribed not only the form of the application for registration but also the form of the certificate of registration.
clause  3  of the form of the certificate- of registration provided that the sale of the specified goods to the dealer for purposes of manufacture and for re- sale will be free of tax.
this was in conformity with the requirement of section 5  2   a   ii  as it stood prior to its amendment and though section 5  2   a   ii  was substituted by the finance act of 19 72, no amendment was made in the form of the certificate of registration and it was only on 29th march, 1973 that clause  3  of the form of the certificate of registration was substituted so as to declare that the sales of the specified goods to the dealer will be free of tax when they are for use as raw materials in the manufacture in the union territory of delhi of goods- for sale in the, manner specified in section 5  2   a   ii  or for resale.
similarly, the form of declaration to be furnished by the purchasing dealer in order to entitle, the dealer who has sold the goods to claim deduction of the amount in respect of such sales under section 5  2   ii , which was prescribed by rule 26, was also not amended until 29th march, 1973 and it continued to be in the following terms certified that the goods mentioned in the cash memo bill no--------------- dated-------------have been purchased by me us from m s.-----------and are duly covered by our registration certificate number---------------dated --------------and are required by me us for, re-sale for use as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale for use in the execution of contract.
signature dealer it was only on 29th march, 1973 that the form of the declaration was substituted by amending rule 26 so as to bring it in line with the amended section 5  2   a   ii  and after the substitution it ran as follows certified that the goods mentioned in the cash memo bill number-------dated---------have been purchased by me us from m s.--------------and are duly covered by me our registration certificate number ------------valid from ------------and are required by me us for 8-211 sci/78 re-sale for use as raw-material, in the manufacture in delhi in accordance with the provisions contained in section 5  2   a   ii  of the bengal finance  sales tax  act, 1941 as in force.
in the union territory of delhi, of goods for sale.
signature .
dealer .
the act as originally enacted ended with section 26 but by amending act of 1959, section 27 was introduced in the act with effect from 1st october, 1959 and this section provided that nothing in the act or under the rules shall be deemed to impose or authorise the imposition of a tax on any sale or purchase of any goods, if such sale or purchase takes place  i  in the course of inter-state trade or commerce  ii  outside the union territory of delhi, or  iii  in the course.
of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of india.
this section was obviously introduced with a view to bring the act into conformity with article 286 of the constitution.
these are the relevant provisions of the act in the light of which we have to decide the question of law arising in the appeals.
the assessees in all the appeals are registered dealers and during the relevant assessment periods they held certificates of registration specifying the class or classes of goods intended for resale by them or for use by them as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
the certificates of registration were in the form as it stood prior to its amendment on 29th march, 1973 and they did not specify that the resale of the goods purchased or their use as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods, or the sale of manufactured goods should be inside delhi.
there are broadly two groups in which the appeals can be.
divided for the sake of convenience.
one group consists of appeals where the assessees purchased goods of the class specified in the certificate of registration as being intended for resale by them and furnished to the dealers selling the goods declarations in the prescribed form, as it stood prior to 29th march, 1973, stating that the goods were intended for resale and thereafter resold the goods, though not within the territory of delhi, while the other consists of appeals where the assessees purchased goods of the class specified in the certificate of registration as being intended for use by them as raw materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and furnished to the dealers selling the goods declarations in the prescribed form, as it stood prior to 29th march, 1973, stating that the goods were purchased by them for use as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and thereafter used the goods purchased as law- materials in the manufacture of goods, in some cases outside delhi and in some others inside, but in the latter, sold the goods so manufactured outside delhi.
civil appeals numbers 1110 of 1977, 1111 of 1977 and 1290 of 1977 are representative appeals belonging to the first group while civil appeals numbers 1526 of 1972, 1085 of 1977, and 1352 of 1977 are illustrative of the appeals belonging to the second group.
some of the appears are brought by special leave directly from the orders of the assessing authority and some others from the appellate or previsional orders.
special leave was granted in these cases without requiring the assessees to exhaust their remedies under the act and to approach the high court of delhi in the first instance, because a decision was already given by the high court of delhi on 26th april, 1974 in fitwell engineers v. financial commissioner of delhi negativing the contentions of the assessees.
the view taken in the orders impugned in the appeals and accepted by the high court of delhi in fitwell engineers case was that for the purpose of section 5  2   a   ii  and the second proviso, resale of the goods purchased was confined to resale inside delhi and so also, use of the goods purchased as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods and sale, of manufactured goods were required to be inside delhi, and, therefore, if the assessees resold the .goods outside delhi or used them as, raw-materials in manufacture outside delhi, or even if the manufacture was inside delhi, sold the goods manufactured, outside delhi, there was utilisation of the goods by the assessees for a purpose other than that for which they were purchased and hence the, second proviso to section 5  2   a   ii  was attracted and the price of the goods purchased was liable to be included in the taxable turnover of the assessees.
the question which arises for determination in the appeals is whether this viewtaken by the taxing authorities and approved by the high court of delhi in fitwell engineers case is correct and can be sustained.
we may first examine the scheme of the relevant provisions of the act in so far as it bears on the present controversy.
every dealer, whose gross turnover exceeds the taxable quantum is liable to pay tax on sales effected by him after a specified date and while he is liable to pay tax, he cannot carry on business unless he gets himself registered and possesses a registration certificate.
though his liability to tax is deter-mined by reference to his gross turnover, whether it exceeds the taxable quantum or not, tax is leviable on him only in respect of his taxable turnover.
the concept of taxable turnover is different from that of gross turnover and to compute taxable turnover of a dealer, certain deductions are required to be made from his gross turnover and one of the deductions is that set out in section 5  2   -a   ii .
what is permitted to be deducted under this provision is turnover on sales by a registered dealer of goods of the class or classes specified in his certificate of registration as being intended for resale by him or for use by him as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
this deduction is allowed with reference to the intended end-use of the goods, namely, that they will be resold or they will be used as raw materials in the manu- facture of goods for sale, according as they are purchased for one purpose or the other.
but in view of the innumerable transactions that may be entered into by the dealers, it would be well nigh impossible for the taxing authorities to ascertain in each case whether the the goods were purchased as being intended for resale or for use as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and hence the the first proviso was enacted qualifying the substantive provision by saying that the turnover the sale covered by the terms of section 5  2   a   ii .
would be deductible only if a declaration duly filled in and signed by the registered dealer to whom the goods are sold and containing the prescribed particulars on a prescribed form- is furnished by the selling dealer.
the result is that a dealer cannot get deduction in respect of the turnover of his sales falling within section 5  2   a   ii  unless he furnishes a declaration containing the prescribed particulars on the prescribed form duly filled in and signed by the purchasing dealer.
the form of declaration prescribed under rule 26 as it stood upto 29th march, 1973 contained an expression of intention of the purchasing dealer to resell the goods purchased or to use them as raw- materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
such declaration given by the purchasing dealer to the dealer selling the goods would afford evidence that the goods were purchased by the purchasing dealer as being intended for resale by him or for use by him as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
the dealer selling the goods would be granted deduction in respect of the sales on the strength of such declaration given by the purchasing dealer.
the requirement of such declaration as condition of deduction is clearly intended to prevent fraud and promote administrative efficiency.
vide kedarnath jute mfg.
company limited v. commercial tax officer 1 .
but what would be the position if the purchasing dealer does not act according to the intention expressed by him in the declaration given to the selling dealer and in the one case, does not resell the goods and in the other, does not use them as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale.
the selling dealer is granted deduction in respect of the sales made by him because the goods are purchased for resale or for use as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale and this intended and-use of the goods purchased is sought to be ensured by taking a declaration in the prescribed form from the purchasing dealer.
but if the goods are utilised by the purchasing dealer for some other purpose contrary to the intention expressed by him in the declaration, the object and purpose of giving deduction to the selling dealer would be defeated.
even so, it would not be right to withdraw the deduction.
granted to the selling dealer because that would be penalising the selling dealer for a breach of faith committed by the purchasing dealer.
the legislative wrath should in all fairness fall on the purchasing dealer and that is why the second proviso has been introduced in the act by delhi amendment act 20 of 1959.
the object of the second proviso is to ensure that the intention expressed by the purchasing dealer in the declaration given by him is carried out and he acts in conformity with that intention.
where the purchasing dealer gives a declaration of intention to resell the goods purchased or to use them as raw-materials in the manufacture of goods for sale, he must act in accordance with that intention, because it is on the basis of that intention that deduction is allowed,to the selling dealer and if he does not carry out that intention