--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number 6767 of 2013  arising out of slp  c  number6778 of 2012  deepali gundu surwase appellant versus kranti junior adhyapak mahavidyalaya  d.ed.  
and others respondents j u d g m e n t g.s. singhvi, j. 1. leave granted.
2. the question which arises for consideration in this appeal filed against order dated 28.9.2011 passed by the learned single judge of the bombay high court, aurangabad bench is whether the appellant is entitled to wages for the period during which she was forcibly kept out of service by the management of the school.
3. the appellant was appointed as a teacher in nandanvan vidya mandir  primary school  run by a trust established and controlled by bagade family.
the grant in aid given by the state government, which included rent for the building was received by bagade family because the premises belonged to one of its members, namely, shri dulichand.
in 2005, the municipal corporation of aurangabad raised a tax bill of rs.79,974/- by treating the property as commercial.
thereupon, the headmistress of the school, who was also president of the trust, addressed a letter to all the employees including the appellant requiring them to contribute a sum of rs.1500/- per month towards the tax liability.
the appellant refused to comply with the dictate of the headmistress.
annoyed by this, the management issued as many as 25 memos to the appellant and then placed her under suspension vide letter dated 14.11.2006.
she submitted reply to each and every memorandum and denied the allegations.
education officer  primary  zilla parishad, aurangabad did not approve the appellants suspension.
however, the letter of suspension was not revoked.
she was not even paid subsistence allowance in terms of the maharashtra employees of private schools  conditions of service  rules, 1981  for short, the rules  framed under section 16 of the maharashtra employees of private schools  conditions of service  regulation act, 1977  for short, the act .
4. writ petition number8404 of 2006 filed by the appellant questioning her suspension was disposed of by the division bench of the bombay high court vide order dated 21.3.2007 and it was declared that the appellant will be deemed to have rejoined her duties from 14.3.2007 and entitled to consequential benefits in terms of rule 37 2  f  of the rules and that the payment of arrears shall be the liability of the management.
paragraphs 4 and 5 of that order read as under 4. considering the order we intend passing it is not necessary for us to deal with the rival contentions of the parties.
that will be for the inquiry committee to decide.
in view of the apprehensions expressed regarding the inquiry being dragged on unnecessarily, it is necessary to safeguard the interests of the petitioner as well.
5. in the circumstances, rule is made absolute in the following terms.
i  the inquiry committee shall conclude the proceedings and pass a final order on or before 31.5.2007.
ii  the petitioner shall be at liberty to have her case represented by smt.sulbha panditrao munde.
iii  the petitioner her representative shall appear, in the first instance, before the inquiry committee at 11 a.m. on 26.3.2007 and, thereafter, as directed by the inquiry committee.
iv  the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of rule 37  2   f  of maharashtra employees of private schools  conditions of service  rules, 1981, as specified in paragraph 11 of the order and judgment of the division bench in the case of hamid khan nayyar s o habib khan v. education officer, amravati and others  supra .
the petitioner shall be deemed to have rejoined the duties from 14.3.2007 and entitled to consequential benefits that would flow out of rule 37  2   f .
the payment of arrears shall be the liability of the management.
5. in the meanwhile, the management issued notice dated 28.12.2006 for holding an inquiry against the appellant under rules 36 and 37 of the rules.
the appellant nominated smt.
sulbha panditrao munde to appear before the inquiry committee, but smt.
munde was not allowed to participate in the inquiry proceedings.
the inquiry committee conducted ex parte proceedings and the management terminated the appellants service vide order dated 15.6.2007.
6. the appellant challenged the aforesaid order under section 9 of the act.
in the appeal filed by her on 25.6.2007, the appellant pleaded that the action taken by the management was arbitrary and violative of the principles of natural justice.
she further pleaded that the sole object of the inquiry was to teach her a lesson for refusing to comply with the illegal demand of the management.
7. the management contested the appeal and pleaded that the action taken by it was legal and justified because the appellant had been found guilty of misconduct.
it was further pleaded that the inquiry was held in consonance with the relevant rules and the principles of natural justice.
8. by an order

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

dated 20.6.2009, the presiding officer of the school tribunal, aurangabad division  for short, the tribunal  allowed the appeal and quashed the termination of the appellants service.
he also directed the management to pay full back wages to the appellant.
the tribunal considered the appellants plea that she had not been given reasonable opportunity of hearing and observed now let us test for what purpose and for what subject inquiry was initiated in what manner inquiry was conducted, which witnesses have been examined and how injury was conclude.
i have already demonstrate above that starting point against this appellant is calling upon staff members collection of fund for payment for tax dues page 54 of appeal memo.
all the staff members have objected this joining hands together page 58 of appeal.
fact finding committee have submitted its report exhibit 62.
report of education officer  primary  in regard to the proposal of appointment of administrator page 71.
if we see issuance of memo by head mistress, i observe that language which is used to revengeful against this appellant.
it seems that attitude towards this appellant was of indecent and i also observed that behaviour of the appellant have also instigated head mistress for the same.
language is of law standard use in the letter by imputing defamed language and humiliation to the appellant.
if we see memos, we can find that some memos are of silly count i.e. late for 3 minutes page 95, query about the examination page 93 to which appellant have replied that when no examinations were held where is the question of getting inquiry by the parents page 96.
in regard to the memo, in regard to the black dress on 15.08.2005 and 06.12.2005 and about issuance of show cause notice for issuing false affidavit page 143.
we can find attitude of this head master towards appellant.
three minute late is very silly ground query about examination which was not at all held, wearing of black dress during course of argument there was argument on photograph, however, no such photograph is submitted on record.
in this regard during course of argument, it was brought to my notice that on 15.08.2005 this appellant have wore black colour blouse, however, she had wore white sari on her person.
first thing is that there is no such rule about so called colour that it is bogus colour or this colour is being used for protesting or otherwise.
how and why head mistress and management have made issue of this black colour blouse i cannot understand.
i have gone through the whole record but i do not find any circular issued by head mistress by which all the staff members have been called upon to come in dress for this function.
so in the absence of such circular, how it can be an issue of inquiry.
another aspect is that one of the staff vijay gedam have lodged appeal before this tribunal in favour of him, this appellant and one another staff teacher have swear affidavit.
i do not find how this issue can be a subject of inquiry that appellant have swear false affidavit.
is head mistress having authority to say that this appellant have swear false affidavit.
here i find 5 to 6 staff members have supported this appellant, at the same time some teachers have also come forward this head mistress.
they were in dilemma to whom they may favour.
so over all attitude of this head mistress against this appellant is revengeful with ulterior motive to drag this appellant in inquiry proceeding.
i gone through the statement recorded of the witnesses.
i find that all the statements are general in nature and it is repetition of statement of first witness surajkumar khobragade.
nobody has made statement specifically with date and incident.
the deposition is a general statement which is already in memos which have been issue by the head mistress to the appellant.
more important in this regard that no cross examination of witnesses by the appellant.
in the statement of witnesses, i do not find any endorsement that appellant was absent or appellant is present, she declined to cross examine or otherwise.
these statements have been concluded that witnesses have stated before inquiry committee, that is all.
if we read first statement of first witnesses we can find carry forward of the statement for other witnesses by some minor change in the statement.
one crucial aspect in regard to the proceeding is that this head mistress who had issued more than 25 bulky memos against this appellant and on whose complaint or grievances this inquiry was initiate, have not been examined by the inquiry committee.
i am surprised that why such a key witness is not examined.
in reply this appellant have put her grievances against head mistress.
by taking advantage of this chief executive officer of the inquiry i.e. sonia bagale called upon written explanation from head mistress to cover up complaint and grievances of the appellant.
it is on 21.05.2007, page 777, 778 and 781 by this explanation again one issues have been brought which were not subject matter of the chargesheet.
so it is serious lacuna in this inquiry proceeding that witnesses head mistress have not been examined.
the tribunal then adverted to the charges levelled against the appellant and held it is also demonstrated in the course of argument that permission was not granted as per letter dated 22.11.2006 of education officer.
so naturally suspension of this appellant was in question.
it is another aspect that on persuasion appellant have been paid subsistence allowance.
however, remaining subsistence allowance till today is not paid to the appellant.
so it can be another ground for vitiating inquiry.
204 1 mh.
l.j. page 676 in case of awdhesh narayan k. singh vs. adarsh vidya mandir trust and another,  a  maharashtra employees of private schools  conditions of service  rules 1981, r.r. 35 and 33- failure to obtain prior permission of authority under rule 33 1  before suspending an employee does not affect the action of suspension pending inquiry- if prior permission is obtained, rule 35 3  is attracted and the suspended employee is entitled for subsistence allowance under the scheme of payment through cooperative banks for a period of four months after which period the payment is to be made by the management.
if an employee is suspended without obtaining prior approval of the education authority, payment of subsistence allowance for entire period has to be made by the management.
so if considered all these aspects, we can find that appeal deserves to be allowed by quashing inquiry held against appellant.
the tribunal finally took cognizance of the fact that the appellant was kept under suspension from 14.11.2006 and she was not gainfully employed after the termination of her service and declared that she is entitled to full back wages.
the operative portion of the order passed by the tribunal reads as under 1  appeal is allowed.
2  the termination order dated 15.06.2007 issued by respondent on the basis of inquiry report is hereby quashed and set aside.
3  the appellant is hereby reinstated on her original post and respondents are directed to reinstate the appellant in her original post as asst.
teacher nandanvan vidyamandir  primary school , aurangabad with full back wages from the date of termination till date of reinstatement.
4  the respondent numbers1 to 3 are hereby directed to deposit full back wages i.e. pay and allowances of the appellant from the date of her termination till the date of her reinstatement in the service, within 45 days in this tribunal from the date of this order.
5  the appellant will be entitled to withdraw the above amounts from this tribunal immediately after it is deposited.
9. the management challenged the order of the tribunal in writ petition number 10032 of 2010.
the learned single judge examined the issues raised by the management in detail and expressed his agreement with the tribunal that the decision of the management to suspend the appellant and to terminate her service were vitiated due to violation of the statutory provisions and the principles of natural justice.
while commenting upon the appellants suspension, the learned single judge observed it has also come on record that the appellant was suspended by suspension letter dated 14.11.2006.
the appellant made representation to the education officer.
the education officer refused to approve suspension of the appellant as per his letter dated 22.11.2006.
from careful perusal of the material brought on record, i do not find that, there arose extraordinary situation to suspend services of the appellant without taking prior approval of the education officer, as contemplated under rules.
no doubt, the management can suspend services of an employee without prior approval of the education officer, but for that there should be extraordinary situation.
however, in the facts of this case, nothing is brought on record to suggest that there was extraordinary situation existing so as to take emergent steps to suspend services of the appellant without taking prior approval of the education officer  primary , zilla parishad, aurangabad.
it is also not in dispute that the education officer declined to approve suspension of the appellant as per his letter dated 22.11.2006.
therefore, taking into consideration facts involved in the present case, conclusion is reached by the school tribunal that the management of the petitioner-school institution is dominated by the members of bagade family.
the learned single judge then considered the finding recorded by the tribunal that the inquiry committee was not validly constituted and observed in the present case, admittedly petitioners herein did not file any application or made prayer for reconstituting the inquiry committee and to proceed further for inquiry by newly reconstituted committee.
on the contrary, from reading the reply filed by the petitioners herein before the school tribunal, it is abundantly clear that the petitioners went on justifying constitution of the committee and stating in the reply that no fault can be attributed with the constitution of the committee.
therefore, in absence of such prayer, the school tribunal proceeded further and dealt with all the charges which were levelled against the appellant i.e. respondent number3 herein.
therefore, in my opinion, further adjudication by the tribunal on merits of the matter cannot be said to be beyond jurisdiction or powers of the school tribunal.
in the facts of this case, as it is apparent from the findings recorded by the school tribunal, that as the case in hand is a case of victimization and petitioner management as well as the inquiry committee having joined hands against the delinquent right from the beginning, no premium can be put over the action of the petitioner-management and inquiry committee who threw the principles of natural justice in the air.
it would be a travesty of justice, in these circumstances, to allow the petitioner- management to once again hold inquiry in such a extreme case.
however, the learned single judge set aside the direction given by the school tribunal for payment of back wages by relying upon the judgments in j.k. synthetics limited v. k. p. agrawal and another  2007  2 scc 433 and zilla parishad, gadchiroli and another v. prakash s o nagorao thete and another 2009  4  mh.
l. j. 628.
the observations made by the learned single judge on this issue are extracted below bare perusal of above reproduced para 40 of the judgment of the school tribunal would make it abundantly clear that, the advocate for the appellant, in the course of arguments, argued that the appellant was kept under suspension from 14.11.2006 till the appeal is finally heard.
it was argued that the appellant was not gainfully employed anywhere during the period of suspension and termination and therefore, she is entitled to back wages from the date of her suspension.
the tribunal has observed that no rebuttal argument by other side.
therefore, it appears that, the school tribunal has considered only oral submissions of the counsel appearing for the appellant, in the absence of any specific pleadings, prayers and evidence for payment of back wages.
there was no application or pleadings before the school tribunal on oath by the appellant stating that she was not gainfully employed from the date of suspension till reinstatement.
therefore, in my considered opinion, finding recorded by the tribunal in clauses 3 to 5 of the operative order, in respect of payment of back wages, cannot be sustained, in the light of law laid down by this court and honourable supreme court in respect of payment of back wages.
10. learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the judgments of this court in hindustan tin works private limited v. employees of hindustan tin works private limited  1979  2 scc 80, surendra kumar verma v. central government industrial tribunal-cum-labour court, new delhi  1980  4 scc 443, mohan lal v. management of bharat electronics limited  1981  3 scc 225, workmen of calcutta dock labour board and another v. employers in relation to calcutta dock labour board and others  1974  3 scc 216 and argued that the impugned order is liable to be set aside because while the appellant had pleaded that she was not gainfully employed, no evidence was produced by the management to prove the contrary.
learned counsel submitted that the order passed by the tribunal was in consonance with the provisions of the act and the rules and the high court committed serious error by setting aside the direction given by the tribunal to the management to pay back wages to the appellant on the specious ground that she had not led evidence to prove her non-employment during the period she was kept away from the job.
he emphasized that in view of the embargo contained in rule 33 3 , the appellant had not taken up any other employment and argued that she could not have been deprived of full pay and allowances for the entire period during which she was forcibly kept out of job.
11. learned counsel for the respondent supported the impugned order and argued that the high court did not commit any error by setting aside the direction given by the tribunal for payment of back wages to the appellant because she had neither pleaded nor any evidence was produced that during the period of suspension and thereafter she was not employed elsewhere.
learned counsel relied upon the judgments in m.p.
state electricity board v. jarina bee  2003  6 scc 141, kendriya vidyalaya sangathan v. s.c. sharma  2005  2 scc 363, u.p. state brassware corporation limited v. uday narain pandey  2006  1 scc 479, j. k. synthetics limited v. k.p. agrawal and another  supra , the depot manager, a.p.s.r.t.c.
v. p. jayaram reddy  2009  2 scc 681, novartis india limited v. state of west bengal and others  2009  3 scc 124, metropolitan transport corporation v. v. venkatesan  2009  9 scc 601 and jagbir singh v. haryana state agriculture marketing board and another  2009  15 scc 327 and argued that the rule of reinstatement with back wages propounded in 1960s and 70s has been considerably diluted and the courts tribunal cannot ordain payment of back wages as a matter of course in each and every case of wrongful termination of service.
learned counsel submitted that even if the court tribunal finds that the termination, dismissal or discharge of an employee is contrary to law or is vitiated due to violation of the principles of natural justice, an order for payment of back wages cannot be issued unless the employee concerned not only pleads, but also proves that he she was not employed gainfully during the intervening period.
12.
we have considered the respective arguments.
the act was enacted by the legislature to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of employees in certain private schools in the state and to instill a sense of security among such employees so that they may fearlessly discharge their duties towards the pupil, the institution and the society.
another object of the act is to ensure that the employees become accountable to the management and contribute their might for improving the standard of education.
section 2 of the act contains definitions of various words and terms appearing in other sections.
section 8 provides for constitution of one or more tribunals to be called school tribunal and also defines the jurisdiction of each tribunal.
section 9 1  contains a non obstante clause and provides for an appeal by any employee of a private school against his her dismissal or removal from service or whose services are otherwise terminated or who is reduced in rank.
the employee, who is superseded in the matter of promotion is also entitled to file an appeal.
section 10 enumerates general powers and procedure of the tribunal and section 11 empowers the tribunal to give appropriate relief and direction.
section 12 also contains a non obstante clause and makes the decision of the tribunal final and binding on the employee and the management.
of course, this is subject to the power of judicial review vested in the high court and this court.
section 16 1  empowers the state government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the act.
section 16 2  specifies the particular matters on which the state government can make rules.
these include code of conduct and disciplinary matters and the manner of conducting inquiries.
13. rule 35 of the rules empower the management to suspend an employee with the prior approval of the competent authority.
the exercise of this power is hedged with the condition that the period of suspension shall not exceed four months without prior permission of the concerned authority.
the suspended employee is entitled to subsistence allowance under the scheme of payment  rule 34  through co-operative bank for a period of four months.
if the period of suspension exceeds four months, then subsistence allowance has to be paid by the management.
in case, the management suspends an employee without obtaining prior approval of the competent authority, then it has to pay the subsistence allowance till the completion of inquiry.
a suspended employee can be denied subsistence allowance only in the contingencies enumerated in clauses  3  and  4  of rule 33, i.e., when he takes up private employment or leaves headquarter without prior approval of the chief executive officer.
14.
for the sake of reference, sections 2 7 , 9, 10, 11 and 16 of the act are reproduced below 2 7  employee, means any member of the teaching and non teaching staff of a recognized school and includes shikshan sevak 9.
right of appeal to tribunal to employees of a private school.   1  notwithstanding anything contained in any law or contract for the time being in force, any employee in a private school,-  a  who is dismissed or removed or whose services are otherwise terminated or who is reduced in rank, by the order passed by the management or  b  who is superseded by the management while making an appointment to any post by promotion and who is aggrieved, shall have a right to appeal and may appeal against any such order or supersession to the tribunal constituted under section 8. provided that, no such appeal shall lie to the tribunal in any case where the matter has already been decided by a court of competent jurisdiction or is pending before such court, on the appointed date or where the order of dismissal, removal, otherwise termination of service or reduction in rank was passed by the management at any time before the 1st july, 1976.   2  to  4   xxxx xxxx xxxx 10.
general powers and procedure of tribunal.   1  for the purpose of admission, hearing and disposal of appeals, the tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in an appellate court under the code of civil procedure, 1908, and shall have the power to stay the operation of any order against which an appeal is made on such conditions as it may think fit to impose and such other powers as are conferred on it by or under this act.   2 the presiding officer of the tribunal shall decide the procedure to be followed by the tribunal for the disposal of its business including the place or places at which and the hours during which it shall hold its sitting.   3  xxxx xxxx xxxx 11.
powers of tribunal to give appropriate relief and direction.   1  on receipt of an appeal, where the tribunal, after giving reasonable opportunity to both parties of being heard, is satisfied that the appeal does not pertain to any of the matters specified in section 9 or is not maintainable by it, or there is no sufficient ground for interfering with the order of the management it may dismiss the appeal.   2  where the tribunal, after giving reasonable opportunity to both parties of being heard, decides in any appeal that the order of dismissal, removal, otherwise termination of service or reduction in rank was in contravention of any law  including any rules made under this act , contract or conditions of service for the time being in force or was otherwise illegal or improper, the tribunal may set aside the order of the management, partially or wholly, and direct the management,-  a  to reinstate the employee on the same post or on a lower post as it may specify  b  to restore the employee to the rank which he held before reduction or to any lower rank as it may specify  c  to give arrears of emoluments to the employee for such period as it may specify  d  to award such lesser punishment as it may specify in lieu of dismissal, removal, otherwise termination of service or reduction in rank, as the case may be  e  where it is decided not to reinstate the employee or in any other appropriate case, to give to the employee twelve months salary  pay and allowances, if any  if he has been in the services of the school for ten years or more and six months salary  pay and allowances, if any  if he has been in service of the school for less then ten year, by way or compensation, regard being had to loss of employment and possibility of getting or not getting suitable employment thereunder, as it may specify or  f  to give such other relief to the employee and to observe such other conditions as it may specify, having regard to the circumstances of the case.   3  it shall be lawful for the tribunal to recommend to state government that any dues directed by it to be paid to the employee, or in case of an order to reinstate the employee an emoluments to be paid to the employee till he is reinstated, may be deducted from the grant due and payable, or that may become due and payable in future, to the management and be paid to the employee directly.   4  any direction issued by the tribunal under sub-section  2  shall be communicated to both parties in writing and shall be complied by the management within the period specified in the direction, which shall not be less than thirty days from the date of its receipt by the management.
16. rules.   1  the state government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this act.   2  in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely -  a  to  c  xx xx xx xx   d  the other conditions of service of such employees including leave, superannuation, re-employment and promotions  e  the duties of such employees and code of conduct and disciplinary matters  f  the manner of conducting enquiries  g  xx xx xx xx   2a  to  4   xx xx xx 15. rules 33  1  to  4 , 34 1 ,  2  and 35, which have bearing on the decision of this appeal read as under 33. procedure for inflicting major penalties.   1  if an employee is alleged to be guilty of any of the grounds specified in sub-rule  5  of rule 28 and if there is reason to believe that in the event of the guilt being proved against him, he is likely to be reduced in rank or removed from service, the management shall first decide whether to hold an inquiry and also to place the employees under suspension and if it decides to suspend the employee, it shall authorise the chief executive officer to do so after obtaining the permission of the education officer or, in the case of the junior college of educational and technical high schools, of the deputy director.
suspension shall not be ordered unless there is a prima facie case for his removal or there is reason to believe that his continuance in active service is likely to cause embarrassment or to hamper the investigation of the case.
if the management decides to suspend the employee, such employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule  5  stand suspended with effect from the date of such orders.   2  if the employee tenders resignation while under suspension and during the pendency of the inquiry such resignation shall not be accepted.   3  an employee under suspension shall not accept any private employment.   4  the employee under suspension shall not leave the headquarters during the period of suspension without the prior approval of the chief executive officer.
if such employee is the head and also the chief executive officer, he shall obtain the necessary prior approval of the president.
34.
payment of subsistence allowance.   1   a  a subsistence allowance at an amount equal to the leave salary which the employee would have drawn if he had been on leave on half pay and in addition, dearness allowance based on such leave salary shall be payable to the employee under suspension.   b  where the period of suspension exceeds 4 months, the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order of suspension shall be competent to vary the amount of subsistence allowance for any period subsequent to the period of the first 4 months as follows, namely -  i  the amount of subsistence allowance may be increased by a suitable amount not exceeding 50 per cent of the subsistence allowance admissible during the period of first 4 months, if in the opinion of the said authority, the period of suspension has been prolonged for reasons, to be recorded in writing, not directly attributable to the employee.   ii  the amount of subsistence allowance may be reduced by a suitable amount, not exceeding 50 per cent of the subsistence allowance admissible during the period of the first 4 months, if in the opinion of the said authority the period of suspension has been prolonged due to reasons, to be recorded in writing directly attributable to the employee.   iii  the rate of dearness allowance shall be based on the increased or on the decreased amount of subsistence allowance, as the case may be, admissible under sub-clauses  i  and  ii .  2  other compensatory allowances, if any, of which the employee was in receipt on the date of suspension shall also be payable to the employee under suspension to such extent and subject to such conditions as the authority suspending the employee may direct provided that the employee shall not be entitled to the compensatory allowances unless the said authority is satisfied that the employee continues to meet the expenditure for which such allowances are granted provided further that, when an employee is convicted by a competent court and sentenced to imprisonment, the subsistence allowance shall be reduced to a nominal amount of rupee one per month with effect from the date of such conviction and he shall continue to draw the same till the date of his removal or reinstatement by the competent authority provided also that, if an employee is acquitted by the appellate court and no further appeal or a revision application to a higher court is preferred and pending, he shall draw the subsistence allowance at the normal rate from the date of acquittal by the appellate court till the termination of the inquiry if any, initiated under these rules provided also that, in cases falling under sub-rules  1  and  2  above, where the management refuses to pay or fails to start and continue payment of subsistence allowance and other compensatory allowances, if any, to an employee under suspension, payment of the same shall be made by the education officer or deputy director, as the case may be, who shall deduct an equal amount from the non-salary grant that may be due and payable or may become due and payable to the school.
35. conditions of suspension.   1  in cases where the management desires to suspend an employee, he shall be suspended only with the prior approval of the appropriate authority mentioned in rule 33.   2  the period of suspension shall not exceed four months except with the prior permission of such appropriate authority.   3  in case where the employee is suspended with prior approval he shall be paid subsistence allowance under the scheme of payment through co-operative banks for a period of four months only and thereafter, the payment shall be made by the management concerned.   4  in case where the employee is suspended by the management without obtaining prior approval of the appropriate authority as aforesaid, the payment of subsistence allowance even during the first four months of suspension and for further period thereafter till the completion of inquiry shall be made by the management itself.   5  the subsistence allowance shall not be withheld except in cases of breach of provisions of sub-rules  3  or  4  of rule 33.
16.
the word reinstatement has not been defined in the act and the rules.
as per shorter oxford english dictionary, vol.ii, 3rd edition, the word reinstate means to reinstall or re-establish  a person or thing in a place, station, condition, etc.  to restore to its proper or original state to reinstate afresh and the word reinstatement means the action of reinstating re-establishment.
as per law lexicon, 2nd edition, the word reinstate means to reinstall to re-establish to place again in a former state, condition or office to restore to a state or position from which the object or person had been removed and the word reinstatement means establishing in former condition, position or authority  as  reinstatement of a deposed prince.
as per merriam webster dictionary, the word reinstate means to place again  as in possession or in a former position , to restore to a previous effective state.
as per blacks law dictionary, 6th edition, reinstatement means to reinstall, to re- establish, to place again in a former state, condition, or office?
to restore to a state or position from which the object or person had been removed.
17.
the very idea of restoring an employee to the position which he held before dismissal or removal or termination of service implies that the employee will be put in the same position in which he would have been but for the illegal action taken by the employer.
the injury suffered by a person, who is dismissed or removed or is otherwise terminated from service cannot easily be measured in terms of money.
with the passing of an order which has the effect of severing the employer employee relationship, the latters source of income gets dried up.
not only the concerned employee, but his entire family suffers grave adversities.
they are deprived of the source of sustenance.
the children are deprived of nutritious food and all opportunities of education and advancement in life.
at times, the family has to borrow from the relatives and other acquaintance to avoid starvation.
these sufferings continue till the competent adjudicatory forum decides on the legality of the action taken by the employer.
the reinstatement of such an employee, which is preceded by a finding of the competent judicial quasi judicial body or court that the action taken by the employer is ultra vires the relevant statutory provisions or the principles of natural justice, entitles the employee to claim full back wages.
if the employer wants to deny back wages to the employee or contest his entitlement to get consequential benefits, then it is for him her to specifically plead and prove that during the intervening period the employee was gainfully employed and was getting the same emoluments.
denial of back wages to an employee, who has suffered due to an illegal act of the employer would amount to indirectly punishing the concerned employee and rewarding the employer by relieving him of the obligation to pay back wages including the emoluments.
18. a somewhat similar issue was considered by a three judge bench in hindustan tin works pvt.
limited v. employees of hindustan tin works pvt.
limited  supra  in the context of termination of services of 56 employees by way of retrenchment due to alleged non-availability of the raw material necessary for utilization of full installed capacity by the petitioner.
the dispute raised by the employees r