--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction special leave petition  civil  number6385 of 2010 suraj bhan meena anr.
petitioners versus state of rajasthan ors.
respondents with slp c numbers7716, 7717, 7826, 7838 of 2010 j u d g m e n t altamas kabir, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

since common questions of fact and law are involved, five special leave petitions have been taken up for hearing and final disposal together.
while slp c number6385 of 2010 has been filed by suraj bhan meena anr., slp c numbers7716, 7717, 7826 and 7838 of 2010, have all been filed by the state of rajasthan.
2. all the petitioners are aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 5th february, 2010, passed by the jaipur bench of the rajasthan high court in d.b. civil special appeal  writ  number618/2009 filed by the state of rajasthan anr.
against bajrang lal sharma ors., d.b. civil special appeal  writ  number3/2010 filed by suraj bhan meena against bajrang lal sharma ors., d.b. civil special appeal  writ  number611/2009 filed by the state of rajasthan against gyan prakash shukla, d.b. civil special appeal  writ  number610/2009 filed by the state of rajasthan against m.m. joshi, d.b. civil writ petition number8104/2008 filed by bajrang lal sharma ors.
against the state of rajasthan ors., d.b. civil writ petition number6241/2008 filed by gyan prakash shukla anr.
against the state of rajasthan ors.
and d.b. civil writ petition number7775/2009 filed by m.m. joshi against the state of rajasthan ors.
as indicated hereinbefore, all the matters were heard and disposed of by a common judgment passed by the division bench on 5th february, 2010.
while considering the writ petitions along with the writ appeals, the division bench referred to the facts of d.b. civil writ petition number8104/2008, against which slp c number6385/2010 has been filed by suraj bhan meena and slp c number7716/2010 has been filed by the state of rajasthan.
the other special leave petitions have been filed against the orders passed in the writ petitions filed by the private respondents therein.
3. all the writ petitioners, as also the petitioners in slp c number6385/2010, are members of the rajasthan administrative service and are governed by the rajasthan administrative service rules, 1954.
the writ petitioners in their respective writ petitions challenged the notification dated 25th april, 2008, issued by the state of rajasthan in exercise of its powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the constitution of india amending the rajasthan various service rules with effect from 28.12.2002.
4. according to the writ petitioners, they had been inducted in the rajasthan administrative service in december, 1982, through selection by the rajasthan public service commission.
vide notice dated 26th june, 2000, the state government issued a provisional seniority list of rajasthan administrative service selection grade as on 1.4.1997, in which the writ petitioner number1, bajrang lal sharma, was placed above suraj bhan meena  scheduled tribe  and sriram choradia  scheduled caste .
the said seniority list was published pursuant to the order of this court dated 16.9.1999, passed in the case of ajit singh-ii ors.
vs. state of punjab ors.  1999  7 scc 209 and another order of the same date in the case of ram prasad vs. d.k. vijay  1999  7 scc 251.
once again provisional seniority lists were published on 27.11.2003 and 12.5.2008.
subsequently, the state of rajasthan published the final seniority lists of super time scale and selection scale of the service on 24.6.2008 as on 1.4.1997 and provisional seniority list dated 2.7.2008 as on 1.4.2008, wherein the name of bajrang lal sharma was shown below the names of both suraj bhan meena and sriram choradia.
5. the notification dated 25.4.2008, which was the subject matter of challenge in the writ petition was challenged on two grounds.
it was firstly contended that the proviso dated 28.12.2002, which had been added to the various service rules was subject to the final decision of this court in writ petition  civil  number234/2002 filed by the all india equality forum against the union of india ors., but the same was yet to be decided.
therefore, during the pendency of the writ petition before this court, the respondents had acted improperly in deleting the above-mentioned proviso in the various service rules by the notification dated 25.4.2008, which amounted to giving a consequential seniority to candidates belonging to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, which could not have been given without quantifying the figures of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes candidates to enable a decision to be arrived at that reservation was required in promotion and also to show that the state had to pass such orders for compelling reasons, such as, backwardness, inadequacy of representation, as held by this court in the case of m. nagaraj ors.
vs. union of india ors.  2006  8 scc 212.
it was contended that since the state government had not complied with the directions given by this court in m. nagarajs case  supra , the notification in question was liable to be quashed.
it was further urged on behalf of the writ petitioner, bajrang lal sharma, that in the case of indra sawhney ors.
vs. union of india ors.   1992  supp.
3  scc 217, this court had held that article 16 4  of the constitution of india did not permit reservations in the matter of promotion.
thereafter, the constitution  77th amendment  act, 1995, was enacted and came into force on 17.6.1995.
the subsequent special leave petitions filed by the union of india ors.
against virpal singh chauhan ors.  1995  6 scc 684, ajit singh januja ors.
vs. state of punjab ors.  1996  2 scc 715 and ajit singh-ii ors.
vs. state of punjab ors.  1999  7 scc 209 , introduced the catch-up rule and held that if a senior general candidate was promoted after candidates from the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes have been promoted to a particular cadre, the senior general candidate would regain his seniority on promotion in relation to the juniors who had been promoted against reserved vacancies.
6. the parliament on 4.1.2002 amended the constitution by the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, in order to give the benefit of consequential seniority to the reserved category candidates with effect from 17.6.1995.
the constitutional validity of both the said constitution amendment acts was challenged before this court in other writ petitions, including the writ petition filed by m. nagaraj and all india equality forum.
during the pendency of the writ petitions, this court passed an interim order protecting the promotion and seniority of general obc candidates.
the government of rajasthan, thereafter, deleted the proviso added vide notification dated 1.4.1997.
7. in m. nagarajs case  supra , this court while upholding the constitutional validity of the constitution  77th amendment  act, 1995 and the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, clarified the position that it would not be necessary for the state government to frame rules in respect of reservation in promotion with consequential seniority, but in case the state government wanted to frame such rules in this regard, then it would have to satisfy itself by quantifiable data, that there was backwardness, inadequacy of representation in public employment and overall administrative inefficiency and unless such an exercise was undertaken by the state government, the rule relating to reservation in promotion with consequential seniority could not be introduced.
8. despite the decision in m. nagarajs case, the state government by deleting the proviso, which had been inserted vide notification dated 1.4.1997 on the basis of the catch-up rule and further deleting the new proviso added on 28.12.2002 in the various service rules of the state, had in effect provided consequential seniority to the scheduled castes and schedule tribes candidates, without undertaking the exercise indicated in m. nagarajs case in respect of the three conditions laid down in the said judgment.
it was the case of the petitioners that the impugned notification dated 25.4.2008 was liable to be declared ultra vires to the provisions of the constitution being contrary to the decision of this court in m. nagarajs case.
9. as indicated hereinbefore, it was also the case of the writ petitioners that nowhere in rule 33 of the rajasthan administrative service rules has any provision been made for consequential seniority to reserved category promotees.
as a result, after the judgment in b.k. sharma anr.
vs. state of rajasthan ors.
wlc  raj.   1998  2  583 and in ram prasads case  supra , consequential seniority could not have been assigned to reserve promotees above the senior general obc candidates.
10.
this was the view which had been taken by this bench in the cases of virpal singh chauhan  supra  and ajit singh-i  supra  to the effect that reserve promotees would be entitled for accelerated promotion, but not accelerated seniority.
the same view was reiterated by a constitution bench of this court on 16th september, 1999, while deciding ajit singh-iis case  supra .
it is only on account of the judgment in virpal singh chauhans case  supra  and in the case of ajit singh-i  supra , the state government vide notification dated 1.4.1997 inserted the new proviso in the various service rules.
11.
the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001 was thereafter passed on 4th january, 2002, with retrospective effect from 16th september, 1995, with regard to consequential seniority to reserve promotees.
it was the said amendments which were the subject matter of challenge in several writ petitions, including in m. nagarajs case and in the case of all india equality forum.
12.
on behalf of the petitioners, it was submitted by dr. krishan singh chauhan, that the insertion of the words with consequential seniority in clause iva of article 16 of the constitution after the words reservation in promotion, was only an enabling provision which was under challenge before this court and while the matter was sub-judice, without waiting for the decision of this court in m. nagarajs case and all india equality forum, the state government withdrew its earlier notification dated 1st april, 1997 vide notification dated 28.12.2002.
it has to be kept in mind that as in m. nagarajs case  supra , this court has made it mandatory on the part of the state government to undertake the three exercises in case any rule was required to be framed by the state for reservation in promotion with consequential seniority.
it was submitted that the withdrawal of the notification dated 1.4.1997 by notification dated 28.12.2002 amounted to negating the judgment of this court in ram prasads case  supra  and, accordingly, the notification dated 28.12.2002 was also liable to be quashed by the court.
in short, the question to be decided in this case is whether the state government was reintroducing a concept which had been replaced pursuant to the orders passed by this court, which had been found to be ultra vires the provisions of the constitution.
13.
it was urged on behalf of the petitioners, suraj bhan meena and sriram choradia, that till the decision of this court in the case of indra sawhney vs. union of india  1992  supp.   3  scc 217, this court had almost uniformly applied the rule of reservation in promotion with consequential seniority.
in indra sawhneys case  supra , this court had held that reservation in promotion was unconstitutional, but permitted such reservation to continue for a period of five years.
it is pursuant to the said decision in indra sawhneys case  supra , that the parliament enacted the constitution  77th amendment  act, 1995.
a contrary view was taken in union of india vs. virpal singh chauhan  1995  6 scc 684, wherein it was laid down that the grant of consequential seniority in cases of reservation in promotion was illegal.
the issue was taken further in the case of ajit singh januja vs. state of punjab  1996  2 scc 715 holding that the grant of consequential seniority to reserve category employees, who had got promotion on the basis of reservation, was unconstitutional.
14.
on 7th may, 1997, another bench of this court in the case of jagdish lal vs. state of haryana  1997  6 scc 538 took a diametrically opposite view upon holding, inter alia, that equality should not remain mere idle incantation, but it had to become a vibrant living reality since equality of opportunity could not simply be judged on the merit of the marks obtained by him but by taking into account de facto inequalities which exist in society and to give preference to the socially and economically disadvantaged persons by inflicting handicaps on those more disadvantageously placed.
although such affirmative action might appear to be discriminatory, it was calculated to bring about equality on a broader basis by eliminating the de facto inequalities between the weaker sections and the stronger sections of the community and placing them on a footing of equality in relation to public employment.
15. in view of the opposite stands taken in jagdish lals case  supra  and in ajit singh-is case  supra , the matters were referred to the constitution bench which approved the decision in ajit singh janujas case  supra  and virpal singh chauhans case  supra , upon holding that the case of jagdish lal had not been correctly decided.
as a result, the rule of regain and catch-up was explained as the correct interpretation of the rules.
as mentioned hereinbefore, by enacting the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, the parliament constitutionally nullified the principle of regain and catch-up by enacting the constitution  77th amendment  act, 1995 under its constituent power under article 368 of the constitution.
it was sought to be urged by dr. krishan singh chauhan, learned advocate, that the power which was existing in the government to make provision for consequential seniority in promotion of reservation, which had been eclipsed on account of the decision of this court in virpal singh chauhans case  supra , stood revived by the enactment of the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, with retrospective effect.
16. learned counsel for the petitioners referred to various decisions on the doctrine of eclipse, which we will refer to, if necessary.
17. learned counsel, in addition, contended that the respondents had not acquired any vested right since the constitution amendment acts had been enacted by the parliament only with the intention of nullifying the effects of the judgments of this court in virpal singh chauhans case  supra  and ajit singh-iis case  supra .
dr. chauhan submitted that the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, given effect to from 17th june, 1995, had constitutionally nullified the principle of regain of seniority and the principle of catch-up which had been explained by this court in virpal singh chauhans case  supra .
18.
mr. p.p. rao, learned senior advocate, appearing for the state of rajasthan, submitted at the very outset that the reliefs prayed for in the several writ petitions, which are common in the special leave petitions, praying for a direction that the benefit of reservation in promotion with consequential seniority, should not be given unless the three compelling conditions as indicated in m. nagarajs case  supra , were fulfilled, was totally misconceived in the absence of any challenge to the order dated 10th february, 1975, passed by the state of rajasthan providing for reservations in favour of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes candidates in promotion.
furthermore, no such prayer had been granted by the high court.
mr. rao submitted that the reliefs prayed for was based on a complete misreading of the decision in m. nagarajs case  supra .
19.
mr. rao urged that the high court took an erroneous view that seniority is a vested right in view of the observations made in paragraph 123 in m. nagarajs case that the state was not bound to provide for reservation for scheduled castes scheduled tribes candidates in matters of promotions, but that if it intended to exercise its discretion and make such provision, it had to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance of article 335 of the constitution.
mr. rao submitted that the high court, however, overlooked the opening part of the judgment which indicated that the main issue involved the extent of reservation.
mr. rao submitted that the high court erred in proceeding on the basis that seniority in government service is a vested right, since it is now well settled that the seniority of a government servant can be interfered with by the state by making a rule under the proviso to article 309 of the constitution.
in this regard, mr. rao referred to and relied on the decision of this court in s.s. bola ors.
vs. b.d. saldana ors.   1997  8 scc 522, and t. narasimhulu ors.
vs. state of a.p. ors.  2010  5 scale 730, where the aforesaid principle was enunciated.
it was urged that even otherwise, a right would accrue only when an order is issued to a government servant.
it was further urged that the high courts reliance on the observations in m. nagarajs case  supra , and the statement of the advocate general that the exercise of collection of quantifiable data was not undertaken, is without basis on the ground that the collection of quantifiable data showing backwardness and inadequacy of representation would only arise when the state wished to exercise its discretion in making reservation for scheduled tribes and scheduled castes candidates in matters of promotion and not in a case where reservation had already been made as far back as on 10.2.1975 and was allowed to continue uninterruptedly.
20.
mr. rao submitted that as far as the catch-up principle is concerned, the same had been deleted by the impugned notification dated 25.4.2008.
the first notification deleted the said rule with effect from 1.4.1997, while retaining some reservation in the form of a proviso which too was ultimately deleted by the second notification with effect from 28.12.2002.
mr. rao also referred to the observation made in m. nagarajs case that it could not be said that the equality code under articles 14, 15 and 16 was violated by the deletion of the catch-up rule.
mr. rao submitted that this declaration of the constitution bench had not been noticed by the high court when it held that the two impugned notifications violated articles 14 and 16 of the constitution.
21.
mr. rao also submitted that the doctrine of eclipse, as urged on behalf of the petitioners, was not applicable to the facts of the case since after over-ruling the decision in general manager, southern railway vs. rangachari  1962  2 scr 586, this court had extended the life of the existing reservations for a period of five years.
accordingly, the government order dated 10.2.1975 survived the decision in indra sawhneys case  supra  and during the period of extension of five years, parliament intervened and inserted clause  4-a  in article 16 empowering the state to continue reservations in promotions already made or to make such reservations, if not already made.
mr. rao urged that the 85th amendment was enacted not merely to withdraw the office memorandum dated 31.1.1997, which gave effect to the catch-up rule, but to restore the benefit of consequential seniority with retrospective effect from 17.6.1995 as if there never was any catch-up rule at all in the eye of law.
mr. rao submitted that the contention of the petitioners that for the purpose of giving the benefit of consequential seniority, the state would have to undertake the collection of quantifiable data in regard to backwardness, inadequacy of representation and non-impairment of efficiency, was based on a misunderstanding of the law declared in m. nagarajas case  supra , since it defeats the intent of parliament to give retrospective effect to the constitution  85th amendment  act.
22.
in addition, it was pointed out that in m. nagarajs case  supra  it had been categorically indicated that the concept of consequential seniority did not violate the equality code under articles 14, 15 and 16 by deleting the catch-up principle , as was held in virpal singh chauhans case  supra .
it was submitted that the instant case is a simple case of deletion of the catch-up principle in view of the constitution  85th amendment  act.
it was contended that the provisional seniority list which was quashed by the high court could never become the ground for any accrued right to seniority.
23.
appearing for the intervenor, rajasthan vanijik kar anusuchit jati-janjati mahasangh, hereinafter referred to as mahasangh, mr. pallav shishodia, learned senior advocate, reiterated mr. raos submissions regarding the observations made by this court in paragraph 79 of m. nagarajs case that the concept of catch-up rule and consequential seniority are judicially evolved concepts not implicit in clauses  1  and  4  of article 16 of the constitution and with the concept of equality contained in articles 14, 15 and 16 stood violated by the deletion of the catch-up rule.
the constitution bench also observed that such concepts were based on principles which could not be elevated to the status of constitutional principles or constitutional limitations.
mr. shishodia urged that the deletion of the proviso added by the amendment of 1997 by way of the impugned notification of 28.12.2002 and 25.4.2008, merely gave a quietus to the catch-up rule in harmony with the constitution  85th amendment  act, which was introduced with the specific object of negating the effect of the decisions of this court in virpal singh chauhans case  supra , ajit singh-is case  supra  and in ajit singh-iis case  supra .
it was submitted that since the 85th amendment had been upheld by the constitution bench in m. nagarajs case  supra  the state was duty bound to restore the original practice of giving seniority from the date of substantive appointment, without reference to the catch-up principle.
24.
mr. shishodia concluded on the note that just as the repealing of an enactment would not automatically revive the original act, on the same analogy, mere setting aside or quashing of the impugned notification dated 28.12.2002 and 25.4.2008 would not revive the catch-up rule introduced by notification dated 1.4.1997.
while the repeal of the two notifications dated 28.12.2002 and 25.4.2008 removed the eclipse caused by the judgment in ajit singh-is case  supra , ram prasads case  supra  and ajit singh-iis case  supra , no fresh right of consequent seniority was conferred.
25.
mr. m.l. lahoti, learned senior advocate, appearing for respondent number13 in slp c number6385 of 2010, while reiterating the submissions made on behalf of the other respondents, submitted that the question of reservation had been gone into in detail in indra sawhneys case  supra  and it had been held that if a feeling of complacency relating to promotion was allowed to prevail amongst candidates from the reserved categories, it was bound to generate a feeling of despondency among candidates from the open categories which would affect the efficiency of administration.
it was also held that putting the members of the backward class on a fast track would lead to leap-frogging which could have disastrous effects on the moral of the candidates from the general candidates.
learned counsel went on to submit that the 77th and 85th constitutional amendments were brought about in the constitution after the judgment in indra sawhneys case and provided the government with power to provide reservation in promotion and consequential seniority.
although, the same was challenged in the all india equality forums case, as also in m. nagarajas case, this court upheld the constitutional validity of all the amendments, subject to compelling circumstances being fulfilled by the states.
mr. lahoti also referred to the contents of paragraph 123 of the judgment in m. nagarajas case  supra  which has been referred to hereinbefore, relating to the extent of reservation to be made by the state government.
26.
mr. lahoti submitted that in response to several applications made under the right to information act, 2005, little or no information was supplied with regard to the population, education, public employment, private employment, self- employment, below poverty line population and per- capita income of scheduled tribes and scheduled castes for the years 1951, 2001 and 2009.
in fact, the response of the national commission for scheduled tribes was that they did not have the requisite data for all the information sought for.
27.
mr. lahoti lastly contended that in the absence of any data in relation to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, the parameters laid down in m. nagarajas case were not fulfilled and rule 33 of the rajasthan administrative service rules, 1954 providing for consequential seniority, was unconstitutional as no exercise had been undertaken by the state pursuant to article 16 4-a  of the constitution, and, as such it was not entitled to provide consequential seniority to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes employees.
28.
mr. m.r. calla, learned senior advocate, who appeared for the sole respondent, mr. o.p. harsh, in special leave petition  civil  number7838 of 2010, contended that as far as his client was concerned, he was the selection scale promotee of the year 1991-92 and the judicial decision upholding his position had attained finality and had nothing to do with the amendment of the rules or the constitutional amendment with retrospective effect from 17th june, 1995.
it was submitted that in his case there was no question of any general category candidate gaining seniority over him once he had superseded them on the basis of merit in the year 1991-92.
in other words, once a general category candidate, though initially senior to him, failed to compete against him in merit in the year 1991- 92, he could not regain seniority over his client even if he had been promoted in any subsequent year.
mr. calla urged that when shri harsh had been given the benefit of the catch-up rule in terms of the notification dated 1.4.1997, the general category candidates, who were senior to him but had been superseded by him on the basis of merit in the year 1991-92 for the selection scale, had been wrongly placed above him.
mr. calla further submitted that such an act on the part of the respondents having been challenged by shri harsh in writ petition number3136 of 2000, which was allowed on 30th may, 2001 and the subsequent challenge thereto before the division bench having been dismissed, the order dated 12.9.2001 of the learned single judge had attained finality.
29.
mr. calla also referred to the decision of this court in m. nagarajs case  supra  and submitted that despite the constitutional mandate to the government as per the 77th and 85th amendments, to form an opinion relating to adequate representation for exercise of the powers under articles 16 4  and 16 4-a  of the constitution, no such exercise had been undertaken by the state before exercising the enabling power.
it was submitted that adequate representation of candidates cannot be a constant factor for ever, but was variable for the purpose of providing adequate representation in the services, as circumstances had changed after 1975.
mr. calla submitted that the exercise for adequate representation was the most important factor for the government to exercise its powers under article 16 4  and 16 4-a  of the constitution and the same could not be avoided by the government and the failure to follow the said mandate rendered the exercise of the enabling power invalid.
mr. calla submitted that the various data which came to be disclosed during the hearing of the matter, clearly show that scheduled castes and scheduled tribes candidates were adequately represented and had at times even exceeded the quota and as such it was necessary for an exercise to be undertaken to ascertain the representation of such candidates.
mr. calla submitted that, in any event, since no injustice had been done to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes candidates, the petitioners could have no legitimate cause for grievance with the order of the high court.
30. dr. rajeev dhawan, learned senior advocate who appeared for the respondent number10 in special leave petition  civil  number7716 of 2010, firstly contended that the main issue for decision in this case is whether the conditions enumerated in m. nagarajs case  supra  applied to cases of seniority and promotion after 17th june, 1995, from which date the amendments were declared to be valid in m. nagarajs case  supra .
dr. dhawan submitted that in m. nagarajs case  supra  this court was called upon to consider the provisions of the constitution  77th, 81st, 82nd and 85th amendment  acts relating to reservation in promotion, the principle of carry over, enabling preservation of principles of efficiency and providing for consequential seniority by amending article 16 4-a  by substituting the words in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class, in place of the words in matters of promotion to any class.
dr. dhawan submitted that by the constitution  85th amendment  act, 2001, the legislature reintroduced the concept of consequential seniority to any class in matters of promotion.
31.
it was submitted that after the decision in virpal singh chauhans case  supra , the provisions relating to catch-up were discontinued and the protection which had been given against disputes of seniority by juniors by the notification dated 1.4.1997 was withdrawn, but with a proviso of maintaining the status-quo that was existing as on that date.
32.
dr. dhawan contended that the exercise to be undertaken as per the directions in m. nagarajs case  supra  was mandatory and admittedly such an exercise had not been undertaken before grant of promotion.
the division bench also held that the rights which had been preserved by virtue of the notifications dated 1.4.1997 and 28.12.2002 were vested rights in favour of the writ petitioners and by the impugned judgment, the notifications dated 28.12.2002 and 25.4.2008 had been rightly quashed.
dr. dhawan urged that by the notifications dated 1.4.1997 and 28.12.2002, the government of rajasthan had protected the seniority and merit of candidates.
the decision in m. nagarajs case made a distinction between the existence and the width of the exercise of power under the amendments and validates the amendments subject to the exercise emanating from the above-mentioned principles.
dr. dhawan submitted that the decision in m. nagarajs case did not automatically invalidate or validate any exercise between when the amendments were held to be valid, and 4.1.2000 from when consequential seniority was required to be considered in terms of such amendment.
33.
it was submitted that since the state had not undertaken the exercise which was mandatory in terms of the judgment in m. nagarajs case  supra , the state could not, either directly or indirectly, circumvent or ignore or refuse to undertake the exercise by taking recourse to the constitution  85th amendment  act providing for reservation in promotion with consequential seniority.
34.
dr. dhawan urged that the powers conferred on the state under articles 16 4 , 16 4-a  and 16 1-b  of the constitution are enabling in nature and the expression consequential seniority was optional and not a requirement.
dr. dhawan also urged that what was restored by the decision in m. nagarajs case  supra  was merely the enabling power of the government and exercise of such power in relation to consequential seniority by the state of rajasthan would still have to be reconsidered in accordance with the decision in m. nagarajs case  supra .
35. dr. dhawan submitted that the seniority of the candidates who had been promoted on merit was protected by the notification dated 1.4.1997 and the same was required to be retained and the contingent protection given by the notification of 28.12.2002 was also required to be retained, though the contingency in the last sentence of the notification was liable to be struck down.
dr. dhawan also urged that the restoration of consequential seniority in the notification of 25.4.2002, without conducting the exercise as contemplated in m. nagarajs case  supra , was liable to be struck down and if the state wanted to introduce a provision for consequential seniority, it would have to follow the procedure indicated in m. nagarajs case  supra .
36.
the primary question which we are called upon to answer in these five special leave petitions is whether the amended provisions of article 16 4-a  of the constitution intended that those belonging to the scheduled castes and schedule tribes communities,