--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner sunjay datt vs. respondent state  ii  date of judgment09/09/1994 bench verma, jagdish saran  j  bench verma, jagdish saran  j  ahmadi, a.m.  j  sawant, p.b. jeevan reddy, b.p.  
j  singh n.p.  
j  citation 1994 scc  5  410 jt 1994  5  540 1994 scale  3 1004 act headnote judgment the judgment of the court was delivered by j.s. verma, j.- by an order dated 18-8-1994 made in these special leave petitions by the division bench  b.p. jeevan reddy and n.p. singh, jj.
, these matters relating to grant of bail to the petitioner, an accused in the bombay blasts case being tried by the designated court for greater bombay, have been referred for decision by a constitution bench since certain questions involved in these special leave petitions arise in respect of a large number of persons accused of offences punishable under the terrorist and disruptive activities  prevention  act, 1987  hereinafter referred to as the tada act .
this is how these matters have come up for decision by this bench.
at the commencement of hearing before us, we had indicated that this bench would decide only the questions of law involved in the case as indicated in the order of reference and then send back these matters to the appropriate division bench for decision on merits in accordance with the answers we give to the questions of law.
accordingly, only those facts which are material for appreciating the questions of law which are being decided by us require mention in this order.
2. the questions of law indicated in the said order of reference, to be decided by us, are three, namely  1  the proper construction of section 5 of the tada act indicating the ingredients of the offence punishable thereunder and the ambit of the defence available to a person accused of that offence  2  the proper construction of clause  bb  of sub-section  4  of section 20 of the tada act indicating the nature of right of an accused to be released on bail thereunder, on the default to complete investigation within time allowed therein and  1994  5 scc 402  3  the proper construction and ambit of sub-section  8  of section 20 of the tada act indicating the scope for bail thereunder.
the only material facts for answering the above questions are these the petitioner is one of the several accused persons in case number 1 of 1993 being tried in the designated court for greater bombay in connection with the bomb blasts which took place in bombay on 12-3-1993 killing a large number of persons and causing huge destruction of property.
the case of the prosecution against the petitioner, set out in the charge-sheet, is that on 16-1-1993 he knowingly and intentionally procured from accused anees ibrahim kaskar through sameer ahmad hingora, hanif kadawala, baba ibrahim musa chouhan, abu salem abdul qayoom ansari and manzoor ahmed sayed ahmed 3 ak-56 rifles, 25 hand grenades and one 9 mm pistol and cartridges for the purpose of committing terrorist acts.
by keeping the ak-56 rifles, hand grenades, pistol and cartridges in his possession willingly, accused sanjay dutt facilitated these objectives.
some parts of the rifle, the 9 mm pistol and 53 rounds of live cartridges were recovered during the course of investigation.
accused yusuf mohsin nullwala, kersi bapuji adenia, rusi framrose mulla, ajay yashprakash marwah caused wilful destruction of evidence namely one ak-56 rifle, one 9 mm pistol and cartridges by deliberately removing them from the house of accused sanjay dutt, at his instance, with the intention to protect the offender i.e. sanjay dutt from legal consequences and therefore, they are also guilty of the offence under section 201 ipc.
3. the charge against the petitioner is of several offences including those under the tada act, of which section 5 thereof is one.
reliance is placed by the prosecution on the testimony of certain witnesses, some incriminating circumstances and an unretracted confession by the petitioner himself.
in the said confession, which has remained unretracted, the petitioner admitted receiving 3 ak-56 rifles on 16-1-1993 along with ammunition from the aforesaid persons adding that two days later he returned two of them but retained only one for the purpose of self- defence.
the petitioner further stated that in view of the tense communal situation as a result of the incident at ayodhya on 6-12-1992 and the serious threats given to petitioners father sunil dutt, then a member of parliament, for his active role in steps taken to restore communal harmony and serious threats to petitioners sisters also, all of whom were residing together, the petitioner agreed to obtain and keep one ak-56 rifle with ammunition for protection of his family without the knowledge of his father.
in short, the petitioners statement is that his possession of one ak-56 rifle with ammunition was in these circumstances for self-defence on account of the serious threats to the members of his family, unrelated to any terrorist activity and, therefore, mere unauth

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

orised possession of the weapons and ammunition by him in these circumstances cannot constitute an offence under section 5 of the tada act, and has to be dealt with only under the arms act, 1959.
the petitioner claims to be released on bail on this basis and places reliance on certain other facts pertaining to his conduct to support his assertion that his action is unconnected with any terrorist or disruptive activity.
it is unnecessary here to refer to any other facts which may be material only for the purpose of considering the case of petitioner on the merits for grant of bail.
the designated court has refused bail to the petitioner.
these special leave petitions are against the order of the designated court, in substance, for grant of bail to the petitioner.
4. on these facts, the aforesaid questions of law arise for determination by us.
these questions arise in a large number of cases of persons accused of offences punishable under the tada act and detained for that reason.
it is the general importance of these questions, numerous cases in which they arise and the frequency of their occurrence during the life of the tada act which has occasioned this reference.
5. the decision of the constitution bench in kartar singh v. state of punjabi, it is urged does not fully answer these questions.
it is also urged that the principle enunciated by a division bench in hitendra vishnu thakur v. state of maharashtra2 read in the context of the final order made therein, raises some ambiguity about the true meaning and effect of section 20 4  bb  of the tada act which requires that controversy also to be settled.
we shall now deal with these questions.
6. the terrorist and disruptive activities  prevention  act, 1987 is an act to make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
the statement of objects and reasons indicates the historical background and the situation which led to its enactment.
it is useful to refer to the material portion of the statement of objects and reasons which is, as under the terrorist and disruptive activities  prevention  act, 1985, was enacted in may, 1985, in the background of escalation of terrorist activities in many parts of the country at that time.
it was expected then that it would be possible to control the menace within a period of two years and, therefore, the life of the said act was restricted to a period of two years from the date of its commencement.
however, it was subsequently realised that on account of various factors, what were stray incidents in the beginning have now become a continuing menace specially in states like punjab.
on the basis of experience, it was felt that in order to combat and cope with terrorist and disruptive activities effectively, it is not only necessary to continue the said law but also to strengthen it further.
the aforesaid act of 1985 was due to expire on the 23-5- 1987.
since both houses of parliament were not in session and it was necessary to take immediate action, the president promulgated the terrorist and disruptive activitie s  prevention  ordinance, 1987  2 of 1  1994  3 scc 569 1994 scc  cri  899 2  1994  4 scc 602 1994 scc  cri  1087 jt  1994  4 sc 1987  on the 23-5-1987, which came into force with effect from the 24-5-1987.
4. subsequent to the promulgation of the ordinance, it was felt that the provisions need further strengthening in order to cope with the menace of terrorism.
it is, therefore, proposed that persons who are in possession of certain arms and ammunition specified in the arms rules, 1962 or other explosive substances unauthorisedly in an area to be notified by the state government, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine.
it is further proposed to provide that confession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than a superintendent of police and recorded by such police officer either in writing or on any mechanical device shall be admissible in the trial of such person for an offence under the proposed legislation or any rules made thereunder.
it is also proposed to provide that the designated court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused had committed an offence where arms or explosives or any other substances specified in section 3 were recovered from his possession, or where by the evidence of an expert the fingerprints of the accused were found at the site of offence or where a confession has been made by a co-accused that the accused had committed the offence or where the accused had made a confession of the offence to any other person except a police officer .   emphasis supplied  7. we have heard shri kapil sibal on behalf of the petitioner and shri k.t.s.
tulsi, additional solicitor general on behalf of respondent-cbi.
in view of the general importance of the questions for decision affecting a large number of persons accused of offences under the tada act, we requested shri soli j. sorabjee, a senior advocate of this court to appear as amicus curiae to assist us in deciding these questions.
we have also taken into account the written submissions filed by the national human rights commission with our leave.
we are grateful to the learned counsel for the able assistance rendered by them at the hearing.
8.
certain provisions of the tada act may now be referred.
section 1 provides for the extent, application, commencement and duration of the act, which says that it extends to the whole of india and was to remain in force initially for a period of two years from may 1987 but has been extended from time to time.
the last extension by act number 43 of 1993 is for eight years from its commencement.
several clauses in sub-section  1  of section 2 contain the definitions.
the definition of abet in clause  a  is much wider than that in the indian penal code.
clause  d  defines disruptive activity to give it the meaning assigned to it in section 4 and terrorist act in clause  h  is defined to give the meaning assigned to it in sub-section  1  of section 3.clause  f  defines notified area to mean such area as the state government may by notification in the official gazette specify.
apart from the aid given by the general scheme of the tada act and the object of its enactment to guide the state government in specifying a notified area for the purpose of the tada act, there is no other specific provision dealing with the manner of performance of that exercise.
a notified area is significant for the purpose of section 5 of the tada act which makes mere unauthorised possession of certain arms and ammunition etc. specified therein, a punishable offence.
part 11 of the tada act relates to punishments for, and measures for coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities containing sections 3 to 8.
section 3 gives the meaning assigned to the expression terrorist act and also prescribes the punishment for the same.
similarly, section 4 gives the meaning assigned to the expression disruptive activity and prescribes the punishment for the same.
then comes section 5 which says that a person in mere unauthorised possession of certain arms and ammunition etc. specified therein, in a notified area is punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
this offence is more grave and the punishment more severe than the offence of mere unauthorised possession of the same arms and ammunition etc. provided in the arms act.
section 6 provides for enhanced penalties in certain cases.
section 8 provides for forfeiture of property of persons convicted of any offence punishable under this act in addition to the punishment awarded for the offence.
this section also provides for forfeiture of property of certain other persons accused of any offence under this act.
part iii containing sections 9 to 19 relates to constitution of designated courts, their place of sitting, jurisdiction and power with respect to other offences, apart from the procedure to be followed by the designated courts and certain other matters relating to trial.
section 15 deals with certain confessions made to police officers and the admissibility thereof.
part iv contains miscellaneous provisions which are in sections 20 to 30.
section 20 provides for the modified application of certain provisions of the code of criminal procedure and section 21 deals with presumption as to offences under section 3 of this act.
9. we may now quote for the sake of convenience the provisions of the tada act which are particularly material for our purpose 2. definitions.-  1  in this act, unless the context otherwise requires,-  d  disruptive activity has the meaning assigned to it in section 4, and the expression disruptionist shall be construed accordingly  f notified area means such area as the state government may, by notification in the official gazette, specify  h  terrorist act has the meaning assigned to it in sub-section  1  of section 3, and the expression terrorist shall be construed accordingly part ii punishments for, and measures for coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities 3. punishment for terrorist acts.-  1  whoever with intent to overawe the government as by law established or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or to alienate any section of the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different sections of the people does any act or thing by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other substances  whether biological or otherwise  of a hazardous nature in such a manner as to cause, or as is likely to cause, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons or loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community, or detains any person and threatens to kill or injure such person in order to compel the government or any other person to do or abstain from doing any act, commits a terrorist act.   2  whoever commits a terrorist act, shall,-  i  if such act has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine  ii  in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   3  whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a terrorist act or any act preparatory to a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   4  whoever harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or conceal, any terrorist shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   5  any person who is a member of a terrorists gang or a terrorists organisation, which is involved in terrorist acts, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   6  whoever holds any property derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist act or has been acquired through the terrorist funds shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
4. punishment for disruptive activities.-  1  whoever commits or conspires or attempts to commit or abets, advocates, advises, or knowingly facilitates the commission of, any disruptive activity or any act preparatory to a disruptive activity shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
5. possession of certain unauthorised arms, etc., in specified areas.- where any person is in possession of any arms and ammunition specified in columns 2 and 3 of category i or category iii a  of schedule i to the arms rules, 1962, or bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances unauthorisedly in a notified area, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
6. enhanced penalties.-  1  if any person with intent to aid any terrorist or disruptionist, contravenes any provision of, or any rule made under, the arms act, 1959  54 of 1959 , the explosives act, 1884  4 of 1884 , the explosive substances act, 1908  6 of 1908 , or the inflammable substances act, 1952  20 of 1952 , he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid acts or the rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   2  for the purposes of this section, any person who attempts to contravene or abets, or attempts to abet, or does any act preparatory to the contravention of any provision of any law, rule or order, shall be deemed to have contravened that provision, and the provisions of sub-- section  1  shall, in relation to such person, have effect subject to the modification that the reference to imprisonment for life shall be construed as a reference to imprisonment for ten years.
part iii designated courts 12.
power of designated courts with respect to other offences.-  1  when trying any offence, a designated court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the code, be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence.   2  if, in the course of any trial under this act of any offence, it is found that the accused person has committed any other offence under this act or any rule made thereunder or under any other law, the designated court may convict such person of such other offence and pass any sentence authorised by this act or such rule or, as the case may be, such other law, for the punishment thereof.
15.
certain confessions made to police officers to be taken into consideration.-  1  notwithstanding anything in the code or in the indian evidence act, 1872  1 of 1872 , but subject to the provisions of this section, a confession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than a superintendent of police and recorded by such police officer either in writing or on any mechanical device like cassettes, tapes or sound tracks from out of which sounds or images can be reproduced, shall be admissible in the trial of such person or coaccused, abettor or conspirator for an offence under this act or rules made thereunder provided that co-accused, abettor or conspirator is charged and tried in the same case together with the accused.   2  the police officer shall, before recording any confession under sub-section  1 , explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him and such police officer shall not record any such confession unless upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily.
part iv miscellaneous 20.
modified application of certain provisions of the code.- .   4  section 167 of the code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence punishable under this act or any rule made thereunder subject to the modifications that -  a  the reference in sub-section  1  thereof to judicial magistrate shall be construed as a reference to judicial magistrate or executive magistrate or special executive magistrate  b  the references in sub-section  2  thereof to fifteen days, ninety days and sixty days, wherever they occur, shall be construe d as references to sixty days, one hundred and eighty days and one hundred and eighty days, respectively and  bb  in sub-section  2 , after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- provided further that, if it is not possible to complete the investigation within the said period of one hundred and eighty days, the designated court shall extend the said period up to one year, on the report of the public prosecutor indicating the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond the said period of one hundred and eighty days and  c  sub-section  2-a  thereof shall be deemed to have been omitted.   7  nothing in section 438 of the code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence punishable under this act or any rule made thereunder.   8  notwithstanding anything contained in the code, no person accused of an offence punishable under this act or any rule made thereunder shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless  a  the public prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release, and  b  where the public prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.   9  the limitations on granting of bail specified in sub- section  8  are in addition to the limitations under the code or any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
21. presumption as to offences under section 3.-  1  in a prosecution for an offence under sub-section  1  of section 3, if it is proved  a  that the arms or explosives or any other substances specified in section 3 were recovered from the possession of the accused and there is reason to believe that such arms or explosives or other substances of a similar nature, were used in the commission of such offence or  b  that by the evidence of an expert the fingerprints of the accused were found at the site of the offence or on anything including arms and vehicles used in connection with the commission of such offence the designated court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused had committed such offence.   2  in a prosecution for an offence under sub- section  3  of section 3, if it is proved that the accused rendered any financial assistance to a person accused of, or reasonably suspected of, an offence under that section, the designated court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that such person has committed the offence under that sub-section.
25.
overriding effect.- the provisions of this act or any rule made thereunder or any order made under any such rule shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this act.
we would now consider the questions referred for decision.
section 5 of the tada act 10.
the true meaning and sweep of the offence made punishable under section 5 of the tada act is the main controversy for decision by us.
the constitution bench in kartar singh1 has upheld its constitutional validity and, therefore, the question is one of proper construction of the provision keeping in view the object for which it was enacted, notwithstanding the existence of similar provision in the arms act, 1959.
for the sake of convenience, section 5 of the tada act may be quoted 5. possession of certain unauthorised arms, etc., in specified areas.- where any person is in possession of any arms and ammunition specified in columns 2 and 3 of category i or category iii a  of schedule i to the arms rules, 1962, or bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances unauthorisedly in a notified area, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.   emphasis supplied  the relevant part of schedule i to the arms rules, 1962 incorporated by reference in section 5 of the tada act is as under schedule i ----------------------------------------------------------- category arms ammunition ----------------------------------------------------------- 1 2 3 ------------------------------------------------------------ i.  a prohibited arms as prihibited ammunition as defined in section 2 1  i  defined in section 2 1  h  and such other arms as the and such other articles as central government may, by the central government my, notification in the offi- by notification in the cial gazette, specify to official gazette, specify be prohibited arms.
to be prohibited ammunition  b  semi- automatic fire- ammunition for arms of arms.
other than those category i b . included in -------------------------------------------------------------- category arms ammunition -------------------------------------------------------------- 1 2 3 --------------------------------------------------------------- categories i c  and iii a  smooth bore-guns having barrel of less than 20 in length.   c  bolt action or semi-automatic ammunition for rifles of .303 or 7.62 mm bore or firearms of ca- any other bore which can chamber tegory 1  c .
and fire service ammunition of .303 or 7.62 mm calibre muskets of .410 bore or any other bore which can fire .410 musket ammun- ition pistols, revolvers, or carbines of any bore which can chamber and fire .380 or .455 rimmed cartridges or service 9 mm or .45 rimless cart- ridges.   d accessories for any firearms nill designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by the firing thereof.
iii.
firearms other than those in ammunition for categories i, ii and iv, namely firearms other than those in categor- ies i,ii and iv namely  a  revolvers and pistols.
ammunition for firearms of category iii a .
note.- parts and accessories of any arms or ammunition and charges for firearms and accessories for charges belong to the same category as the arms or ammunition.
11. in the arms act, 1959, section 24-a inserted by act number 25 of 1983 w.e.f.
22-6- 1983 contains provision relating to the prohibition as to possession of notified arms in disturbed areas, etc. and section 25 prescribes the punishment for certain offences which includes punishment to a person who acquires, has in his possession or carries any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition in contravention of section 7, in sub-sections  1  and  1-a  inserted by act of 1988 w.e.f.
27-5-1988 respectively.
section 7 prohibits acquisition or possession etc. of prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition unless specially authorised by the central government in this behalf.
clauses  h  and  i  of sub-section  1  of section 2 of the arms act define prohibited ammunition and prohibited arms respectively.
section 11 of the arms act empowers the central government by notification in the official gazette to prohibit import or export of arms etc.
while section 12 contains a similar power to restrict or prohibit transport of arms.
there is no dispute that the prohibition against unauthorised possession of the categories of arms and ammunition etc. specified in section 5 of the tada act could as well be covered by the arms act and the rules framed thereunder, if necessary, by a further amendment thereof which would be governed by the general law relating to investigation and trial of such offences without attracting the more stringent and drastic provisions of the tada act.
however, parliament has chosen to adopt the course of enacting section 5 in the tada act which has the result of governing the investigation, trial and punishment of the offence by the more stringent provisions in this behalf in the tada act.
in short, the offence prescribed by and made punishable under section 5 of the tada act is a graver offence governed by more stringent provisions for its investigation and trial while providing a more severe maximum, with a minimum punishment of five years imprisonment for it.
it is this difference which is the reason for the controversy raised about the true meaning and scope of the offence prescribed by section 5 of the tada act and the rights of the accused in this context.
12.
the ingredients of the offence punishable under section 5 of the tada act are  i  possession of any of the specified arms and ammunition etc.,  ii  unauthorisedly,  iii  in a notified area.
if these ingredients of the offence are proved, then the accused shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
admittedly, this punishment prescribing a minimum sentence of five years imprisonment for unauthorised possession of any of the specified arms etc.
with the maximum extending to life imprisonment, is more severe as compared to the punishment for the corresponding offence under the arms act.
in addition to it, the other provisions of the tada act which include admissibility of some evidence against the accused which is inadmissible under the general law coupled with a longer period available for completing the investigation enabling longer custody of the accused and the overall more stringent provisions of the tada act loads the prosecution more heavily against the accused under the tada act.
13.
the tada act was enacted to make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto in the background of escalation of the terrorist and disruptive.
activities in the country.
there is also material available for a reasonable belief that such activities are encouraged even by hostile foreign agencies which are assisting influx of lethal and hazardous weapons and substances into the country to promote escalation of these activities.
the felt need of the times is, therefore, proper balancing of the interest of the nation vis-a-vis the rights of a person accused of an offence under this act.
the rights of a person found in unauthorised possession of such a weapon or substance in this context, to prove his innocence of involvement in a terrorist or disruptive activity, is to be determined.
14.
the construction made of any provision of this act must, therefore, be to promote the object of its enactment to enable the machinery to deal effectively with persons involved in, and associated with, terrorist and disruptive activities while ensuring that any person not in that category should not be subjected to the rigours of the stringent provisions of the tada act.
it must, therefore, be borne in mind that any person who is being dealt with and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the tada act must ordinarily have the opportunity to show that he does not belong to the category of persons governed by the tada act.
such a course would permit exclusion from its ambit of the persons not intended to be covered by it while ensuring that any person meant to be governed by its provisions, will not escape the provisions of the tada act, which is the true object of the enactment.
such a course while promoting the object of the enactment would also prevent its misuse or abuse.
such a danger is not hypothetical but real in view of serious allegations supported by statistics of the misuse of provisions of the tada act and the concern to this effect voiced even by the national human rights commission.
15.
it is the duty of courts to accept a construction which promotes the object of the legislation and also prevents its possible abuse even though the mere possibility of abuse of a provision does not affect its constitutionality or construction.
abuse has to be checked by constant vigilance and monitoring of individual cases and this can be done by screening of the cases by a suitable machinery at a high level.
it is reported that in some states, after the decision of this court in kartar singh 1, high-powered committees have been constituted for screening all such cases.
it is hoped that this action will be taken in all the states throughout the country.
persons aware of instances of abuse, including the national human rights commission, can assist by reporting such instances with particulars to that machinery for prompt and effective cure.
however, that is no reason, in law, to doubt its constitutionality or to alter the proper construction when there is a felt need by parliament for enacting such a law to cope with, and prevent terrorist and disruptive activities threatening the unity and integrity of the country.
16.the settled rule of construction of penal provisions is, that if there is a reasonable interpretation which will avoid the penalty in any particular case, we must adopt that construction and if there are two reasonable constructions, we must give the more lenient one and if two possible and reasonable constructions can be put upon a penal provision, the court must lean towards that construction which exempts the subject from penalty rather than the one which imposes penalty.   see london north eastern rly company v. berriman3 tolaram relumal v. state of bombay4 and state of m.p.
v. azad bharat finance company 5   17.
applying the settled rule of construction of penal statutes in niranjan singh karam singh punjabi v. jitendra bhimraj bijjaya6, a division bench of this court speaking through one of us  ahmadi, j.  construing certain provisions of the tada act reiterated the principle thus  scc pp.
85- 86, para 8  the act is a penal statute.
its provisions are drastic in that they provide minimum punishments and in certain cases enhanced punishments also make confessional statements made to a police officer not below the rank of a superintendent of police admissible in evidence and mandates raising of a rebuttable presumption on proof of facts stated in clauses  a  to  d  of sub-section  1  of section 21.
provision is also made in regard to the identification of an accused who is not traced through photographs.
there are some of the special provisions introduced in the act with a view to controlling the menace of terrorism.
these provisions are a departure from the ordinary law since the said law was found to be inadequate and not sufficiently effective to deal with the special class of offenders indulging in terrorist and disruptive activities.
there can, therefore, be no doubt that the legislature considered such crimes to be of an aggravated nature which could not be checked or controlled unde r the ordinary law and enacted deterrent provisions to combat the same.
the legislature, therefore, made special provisions which can in certain respects be said to be harsh, created a special forum for the speedy disposal of such cases, provided for raising a presumption of guilt, placed extra restrictions in regard to the release of the offender on bail, and made suitable changes in the procedure with a view to achieving its objects.
it is well settled that statutes which impose a term of imprisonment for what is a criminal offence under the law must be strictly construed.
therefore, when a law visits a person with serious penal consequences extra care must be taken to ensure that those whom the legislature did not intend to be covered by the express language of the statute are not roped in by stretching the language of the law.
with respect, we fully concur with the above perception for construing the provisions of the tada act.
18.
it is with this perspective we must proceed to spell out the ingredients of the offence created by section 5 of the tada act and the extent of the right of the accused to defend himself of that charge.
we have 3  1946  1 all er 255, 270  hl  4  1955  1 scr 158 air 1954 sc 496 1954 cri lj 1333 5 1966 supp scr 473 air 1967 sc 276 1967 cri lj 285 6  1990  4 scc 76 1991 scc  cri  47 already indicated the ingredients of the offence punishable under section 5 of the tada act.
19.
the meaning of the first ingredient of possession of any such arms etc. is not disputed.
even though the word possession is not preceded by any adjectiv