--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

1 reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number3601 of 2020   special leave petition  civil  number 28150 of 2017  shri ram sahu  dead  through lrs ors.  
appellants versus vinod kumar rawat ors.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondents judgment m. r. shah, j. 1. leave granted.
feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order dated 14.07.2017 passed by the high court of madhya pradesh at gwalior in review petition number465 of 2015 in first appeal number241 of 2005, by which the high court has allowed the said review petition signature not verified digitally signed by arjun bisht date 2020.11.03 filed by the respondent numbers 1 and 2 herein original defendants 164700 ist reason numbers 1 and 2, and has reviewed the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number241 of 2005 and has deleted the observations made in para 20 of the said judgment and order more particularly with respect to the observations made in para 20 as regards the possession of the disputed house, which were in favour of the appellants the original plaintiffs, the appellants have preferred the present appeal.
2. the relevant facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under that one shri ram sahu, the predecessor of the appellants herein instituted civil suit number04a of 2005 before the learned trial court against the respondents herein original defendants for declaration of registered sale deed dated 25.03.1995 executed by original defendant number3 in favour of original defendant numbers 1 2 regarding house number28/955  previous house number3/1582 , situated in sube ki payga, jiwajiganj, lashkar, as null and void and for permanent injunction against defendant numbers 1 2 restraining defendant numbers 1 2 from transferring the disputed property to any other person.
2.1.
that the original plaintiff shri ram sahu claimed the ownership of the disputed property on the basis of the will executed by one chhimmabai executed in his favour on 19.10.1993.
the original plaintiff also claimed that he became the sole owner on the death of the chhimmabai and possession holder of the entire house and in the same capacity he is in continuous possession over the same.
it was the case on behalf of the defendants that the said chhimmabai adopted defendant number3 and later on, she got registered the adoption deed on 13.05.1992 and that the original defendant number3 sold the disputed property in favour of the respondent numbers 1 2.
the original plaintiff denied the adoption of defendant number3 by the said chhimmabai.
the written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents.
they denied that the disputed property was the joint hindu family property.
defendant numbers 1 and 2 also claimed to be the bona fide purchasers and in possession of the suit property.
2.2.
the learned trial court framed the following issues 1.
whether, the disputed house number28/95 situated in sube ki payga, jiwajiganj, lashkar, gwalior was purchased from the income of joint hindu family of ghasilal and mangaliya?
2. whether, the wife of ghasilal namely chhimmabai had executed will of aforesaid house in favour of the plaintiff on 19.10.1993? 3.
whether, defendant number3 was adopted by ghasilal on 28.01.1985, which was got registered by chhimmabai on 13.05.1992.
4. whether, sale deed dated 25.03.1995 regarding the disputed house was executed by defendant number3 in favour of defendant numbers 1 2 without having any right?
5. whether, the plaintiff is entitled to get the registered sale deed dated 25.03.1995 as null and void?
6. whether, plaintiff is entitled to receive permanent injunction against the defendant numbers 1 2 for not to sell the disputed house?
7. whether, the defendant numbers 1 2 are entitled to receive special compensation from the plaintiff?
if yes, then how much?
8. relief costs.
2.3.
both the parties led the evidence, oral as well as documentary, in support of their respective claims.
2.4. original plaintiff shri ram sahu appellant herein was examined as pw1.
he was also crossexamined  his deposition shall be discussed herein below .
he also led the evidence in support of his claim that he is in possession of the said property.
on behalf of the defendants, defendant number1 stepped into the witness box and through him the defendants also produced on record the documentary evidences.
2.5.
on appreciation of the evidence, the learned trial court dismissed the suit.
the learned trial court disbelieved the case on behalf of plaintiff appellant herein that chhimmabai executed the will in favour of the plaintiff appellant.
the learned trial court held that the defence had proved that defendant number3 was adopted by ghasilal on 26.01.1985 which was got registered later on by chhimmabai vide adoption deed dated 13.05.1992.
2.6. feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial court dismissing the suit, the original plaintiff appellant herein preferred first appeal number241 of 2005 before the high court.
that during the pendency of the said appeal, respondent number1 herein filed an application under section 151 c.p.c.
on 19.03.2012 for dismissing the appeal and for directing the appellant herein to vacate the suit property.
that during the pendency of the appeal the original plaintiff appellant herein filed an application under order 6 rule 17 of the cpc by which the plaintiff sought amendment in the relief clause as regards the issuance of permanent injunction and restraining defendant numbers1 and 2 from dispossessing the plaintiffs forcibly from the disputed house.
however, the said application came to be dismissed by the high court on the ground of delay and latches  i.a.
number2244 of 2012 .
however, while dismissing the said application the high court granted permission to the appellants to file a separate suit for the said relief against the defendants.
thereafter on appreciation of the evidence on record, the high court dismissed the said appeal preferred by the original plaintiff.
however, while dismissing the appeal the high court also made observations as regards the possession of the disputed house and on analysis of the deposition of pw1 and pw2 and considering the material on record and considering the fact that during the pendency of the appeal the original defendant number1 himself filed an application under section 151 cpc on 02.12.2013 for getting the possession from the plaintiff of the disputed house, which was withdrawn, the high court made observations in regards the possession of the plaintiffs of the disputed house.
2.7 thereafter almost 2 years after the judgment of the high court in the first appeal, the respondent numbers1 2 herein original defendant numbers 1 2 filed an application before the high court seeking review of observations in para 20 of the judgment as regards the possession of the disputed house.
the said application was opposed by the appellants herein.
however, by the impugned order, the high court has allowed the review application and has ordered to delete para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number241 of 2005, by observing that as regards the possession of the disputed property the issue of possession was neither raised before the learned trial court nor before the first appellate court and even no issue with respect to possession was framed by the learned trial court.
2.8. feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order passed by the high court in allowing the review application and deleting para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number241 of 2005, the original plaintiffs have preferred the present appeal.
3. shri a.k. srivastava, learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has made the following submissions, while assailing the impugned order passed by the high court passed in the review application.   i  while passing the impugned order, the high court has exceeded in its jurisdiction, while exercising the review jurisdiction and has acted beyond the scope and ambit of the review jurisdiction under order 47 rule 1 cpc  ii  while exercising the review jurisdiction, the high court ought not to have set aside the specific finding given with respect to possession, which finding was based on appreciation of evidence before the learned trial court  iii  the high court has committed a grave error in deleting para 20 of the final judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number 241/2005, in exercise of its review jurisdiction inasmuch as, as such, there was no error apparent on the face of the record, which was required to be corrected  iv  merely because the specific issue with respect to possession was not framed by the learned trial court, cannot be a ground to set aside the finding by the high court, when such finding with respect to possession was on merits and on appreciation of the evidence before the learned trial court  v  as such, the high court has committed a grave error in considering the issues framed in another case being civil suit number 3a/2005, which was related to house number 28/956 and in which the parties were also different.
it is submitted that the high court has misdirected itself, while considering the issues framed in civil suit number 3a/2005, related to house number 28/956 and not considering the issues framed in civil suit number 4a/2005   vi  the high court ought to have appreciated that the issue of possession was at large before the learned trial court and, in fact, the parties also led evidence with respect to possession.
it is submitted that the high court ought to have appreciated that there was a specific averment in the plaint as well as in the testimony of the plaintiff that he is in possession of the suit property, i.e., house number 28/955  vii  the defendants did not led any evidence with respect to possession.
it is submitted therefore that when there were specific averments and pleadings in the plaint in regard to possession, and even the plaintiff led the evidence specifically on the possession, nonframing of the specific issue with respect to possession would not vitiate the finding recorded by the high court, which was on appreciation of the material on record.
in support of his submission, learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has relied upon the following decisions of this court, sri gangai vinayagar temple v. meenakshi ammal  2015  3 scc 624 bhuwan singh v. oriental insurance company limited  2009  5 scc 136 and sayeda akhtar v. abdul ahad  2003  7 scc 52.
it is submitted that all the parties were aware of the rival cases and the issue with respect to possession was present and even the plaintiffs also led evidence on possession, nonframing of the specific issue with respect to possession would be nonsignificant.
it is submitted that therefore the high court has committed a grave error in deleting para 20 of the final judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number 241/2005 with respect to possession mainly on the ground that no issue was framed by the learned trial court with respect to possession 3.1 learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has also taken us to the relevant averments in the plaint as well as the written statement in regard to possession.
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has also taken us to the testimony of the plaintiff shri ram sahu, as well as, the deposition of one j.k. sharma examined on behalf of the plaintiff.
learned senior advocate has further submitted that there was no crossexamination by the defendants on the point of the plaintiffs possession.
learned senior advocate has also heavily relied upon the application and affidavit dated 19.03.2012 in which the respondents in an application filed under section 151 of the cpc specifically prayed to direct the appellants to vacate the suit property.
it is submitted that therefore, in fact, the respondents admitted the possession of the appellants.
it is submitted that not only that, but subsequently in the month of september, 2017, the respondents filed a suit against the appellants for decree of possession, compensation and mesne profits.
it is submitted that therefore, as such, the respondents herein specifically admitted the possession of the appellants in the suit property 3.2 it is further submitted that the high court ought to have appreciated that the review application was filed with a malafide intention faced with the proceedings under section 340 read with section 195 cr.p.c and faced with the order passed by the learned magistrate directing to register the case against respondent numbers 1 and 2 herein and others under sections 193, 465, 471 and 120b of the ipc, dated 06.02.2016 3.3 it is further submitted that, in fact, the appellants filed an application before the high court under order 6 rule 17 cpc  ia number 2244/2012  to amend the plaint by adding relief for the grant of decree of permanent injunction restraining the respondents defendants not to dispossess them forcibly.
it is submitted that the said application was opposed by the respondents herein by submitting that they are not threatening to dispossess the appellants during the pendency of the suit.
therefore, the high court dismissed the said application under order 6 rule 17 cpc reserving liberty in favour of the appellants to file a separate suit for the aforesaid relief.
it is submitted that therefore, as such, the issue with respect to possession was at large even before the high court 3.4 learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has also heavily relied upon the order passed by the learned magistrate on an application filed under section 340 read with section 195 cr.p.c., in which the learned magistrate took note of the affidavit dated 19.03.2012 filed by the respondents and also took note of the specific observation and finding with respect to possession made in para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013.
it is submitted that there is a specific finding given by the learned magistrate on the respondents forging creating concocting the documents to show their possession.
it is submitted that only thereafter the learned magistrate directed to register the case against the respondents under sections 193, 465, 471 and 120b of the ipc, under the provisions of section 340 cr.p.c 3.5 it is submitted that even subsequently the suit filed by the defendantsrespondents herein, filed in the year 2017, has been dismissed by the high court on the ground of limitation and the plaint has been rejected in exercise of powers under order 7 rule 11 cpc 3.6 making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
4. shri punit jain, learned advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents while opposing the present appeal and supporting the impugned order passed by the high court has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case the high court has not committed an error in deleting para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number241 of 2005 in exercise of the review jurisdiction.
4.1 it is submitted that as such the original plaintiff filed the suit seeking cancellation of the sale deed dated 25.03.1995 and permanent injunction to the effect that the defendant numbers 1 2  respondents herein  shall not transfer the property to any other person.
it is submitted that since no injunction from dispossession was sought and only injunction against further transfer was sought no issue was framed in respect of possession.
it is submitted that therefore in absence of any specific issue framed by the learned trial court in respect of possession of the property and when the suit was dismissed and even thereafter the appeal also came to be dismissed, there was no reason and or occasion for the high court to make any observation in respect of possession and therefore the high court has rightly deleted the observations made in para 20 in respect of possession.
it is submitted that during the lifetime of shri ghisa lal sahu, he was in possession of the property.
after his death, his wife smt.
chhimmabai came into possession of the property.
she continued to be in possession and after her, the adopted son dilip kumar sahu came into possession.
the issue of adoption of shri dilip kumar sahu was a subject matter of litigation in suit number4a of 2001, where the said adoption and the adoption deed dated 13.05.1992 was challenged.
the said suit was finally dismissed by the high court by an order dated 07.09.2009 in sa number315 of 2005.
the will setup by the petitioner dated 19.10.1993 was also a subject matter of suit number45a of 2003 filed by dilip kumar sahu.
the said suit was decreed by a judgment dated 07.09.2009 in sa number946 of 2005.
some parts of the property was in possession of tenants  i  om babu saxena and  ii  kashmir singh yadav.
shri dilip kumar sahu got possession from the said tenants on 30.01.1995 by entering into compromises with them.
shri dilip kumar sahu executed sale deed dated 25.03.1995 in favour of the respondents.
under the said sale, possession of the property was given to the respondents.
the petitioner got possession of another portion of the property from another tenant parvesh singh jadon pursuant to a judgment and decree dated 18.10.2014.
the petitioner has not shown as to how, under what capacity and when the petitioner came into possession of the property, constructive or otherwise.
4.2 so far as the withdrawal of the application dated 02.12.2013 in i.a.
number1267 of 2012 which was filed by the respondents is concerned, it is submitted that the said application was withdrawn since  i  no relief could have been claimed arising out of a suit initiated by the plaintiffs and  ii  further the portion of the property in possession of the estranged wife of the petitioner smt.
sheela sahu who was not a party to the said proceedings.
4.3 it is submitted even the application submitted by the petitioner under order 6 rule 17 cpc to amend the prayer clause of permanent injunction restraining the defendants from dispossessing the appellants forcibly from the disputed house, came to be dismissed by the high court, though with a permission to file a separate suit but the petitioners had not filed any instant suit for the aforesaid reliefs.
4.4 it is submitted that therefore when the issue in respect to possession was neither before the learned trial court nor before the high court and despite the same observations were made in para 20 in respect of possession, subsequently the same has been rightly deleted in exercise of the review jurisdiction.
it is submitted that the court has an inherent power to correct the error if subsequently it is bound that some of the observations were made by error.
5. by the impugned order the high court in exercise of powers under section 114 read with order 47 rule 1 cpc has allowed the review petition and has reviewed the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in first appeal number241 of 2005 insofar as deleting the observations made in para 20 as regards the possession of the disputed property, which were in favour of the appellants original plaintiffs.
from the impugned order passed by the high court, it appears that the high court has deleted the observations made in para 20 as regards possession of the plaintiffs mainly solely on the ground that the issue of possession was neither before the learned trial court nor was it before the first appellate court and no such issue with respect to possession was framed by the learned trial court.
therefore, the short question falls for consideration before this court is, whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the high court is justified in allowing the review application in exercise of powers under section 114 read with order 47 rule 1 cpc on the aforesaid grounds?
6. while considering the aforesaid question, the scope and ambit of the courts power under section 114 read with order 47 rule 1 cpc is required to be considered and for that few decisions of this court are required to be referred to.
6.1 in the case of haridas das vs. usha rani banik  smt.  and others,  2006  4 scc 78 while considering the scope and ambit of section 114 cpc read with order 47 rule 1 cpc it is observed and held in paragraph 14 to 18 as under 14.
in meera bhanja v. nirmala kumari choudhury,  1995  1 scc 170 it was held that 8.
it is well settled that the review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have to be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of order 47 rule 1 cpc.
in connection with the limitation of the powers of the court under order 47 rule 1, while dealing with similar jurisdiction available to the high court while seeking to review the orders under article 226 of the constitution, this court, in aribam tuleshwar sharma v. aribam pishak sharma,  1979  4 scc 389 speaking through chinnappa reddy, j. has made the following pertinent observations it is true there is nothing in article 226 of the constitution to preclude the high court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by it.
but, there are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review.
the power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was made it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record is found, it may also be exercised on any analogous ground.
but, it may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits.
that would be the province of a court of appeal.
a power of review is not to be confused with appellate power which may enable an appellate court to correct all manner of errors committed by the subordinate court.
15.
a perusal of order 47 rule 1 shows that review of a judgment or an order could be sought  a  from the discovery of new and important matters or evidence which after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant  b  such important matter or evidence could not be produced by the applicant at the time when the decree was passed or order made and  c  on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or any other sufficient reason.
16.
in aribam tuleshwar sharma v. aribam pishak sharma, air 1979 sc 1047, this court held that there are definite limits to the exercise of power of review.
in that case, an application under order 47 rule 1 read with section 151 of the code was filed which was allowed and the order passed by the judicial commissioner was set aside and the writ petition was dismissed.
on an appeal to this court it was held as under  scc p. 390, para 3  it is true as observed by this court in shivdeo singh v. state of punjab, air 1963 sc 1909 there is nothing in article 226 of the constitution to preclude a high court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by it.
but, there are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review.
the power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was made it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record is found it may also be exercised on any analogous ground.
but, it may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits.
that would be the province of a court of appeal.
a power of review is not to be confused with appellate powers which may enable an appellate court to correct all manner of errors committed by the subordinate court.
17.
the judgment in aribam case has been followed in meera bhanja.
in that case, it has been reiterated that an error apparent on the face of the record for acquiring jurisdiction to review must be such an error which may strike one on a mere looking at the record and would not require any longdrawn process of reasoning.
the following observations in connection with an error apparent on the face of the record in satyanarayan laxminarayan hegde v. millikarjun bhavanappa tirumale, air 1960 sc 137 were also noted an error which has to be established by a longdrawn process of reasoning on points where there may conceivably be two opinions can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record.
where an alleged error is far from selfevident and if it can be established, it has to be established, by lengthy and complicated arguments, such an error cannot be cured by a writ of certiorari according to the rule governing the powers of the superior court to issue such a writ.
18.
it is also pertinent to mention the observations of this court in parsion devi v. sumitri devi,  1997  8 scc 715.
relying upon the judgments in aribam and meera bhanja it was observed as under 9.
under order 47 rule 1 cpc a judgment may be open to review inter alia if there is a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the record.
an error which is not selfevident and has to be detected by a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record justifying the court to exercise its power of review under order 47 rule 1 cpc.
in exercise of the jurisdiction under order 47 rule 1 cpc it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be reheard and corrected.
a review petition, it must be remembered has a limited purpose and cannot be allowed to be an appeal in disguise.
6.2 in the case of lily thomas vs. union of india,  2000  6 sc 224, it is observed and held that the power of review can be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute a view.
such powers can be exercised within the limits of the statute dealing with the exercise of power.
it is further observed in the said decision that the words any other sufficient reason appearing in order 47 rule 1 cpc must mean a reason sufficient on grounds at least analogous to those specified in the rule as was held in chhajju ram vs. neki, air 1922 pc 112 and approved by this court in moran mar basselios catholicos vs most rev. mar poulose athanasius, air 1954 sc 526.
12.3 in the case of inderchand jain vs. motilal,  2009  14 scc 663 in paragraphs 7 to 11 it is observed and held as under 7. section 114 of the code of civil procedure  for short the code  provides for a substantive power of review by a civil court and consequently by the appellate courts.
the words subject as aforesaid occurring in section 114 of the code mean subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed as appearing in section 113 thereof and for the said purpose, the procedural conditions contained in order 47 of the code must be taken into consideration.
section 114 of the code although does not prescribe any limitation on the power of the court but such limitations have been provided for in order 47 of the code rule 1 whereof reads as under 17.
the power of a civil court to review its judgment decision is traceable in section 114 cpc.
the grounds on which review can be sought are enumerated in order 47 rule 1 cpc, which reads as under 1. application for review of judgment.
1  any person considering himself aggrieved  a  by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred,  b  by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or  c  by a decision on a reference from a court of small causes, and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of judgment of the court which passed the decree or made the order.
8. an application for review would lie inter alia when the order suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record and permitting the same to continue would lead to failure of justice.
in rajendra kumar v. rambai this court held  scc p. 514, para 6  6.
the limitations on exercise of the power of review are well settled.
the first and foremost requirement of entertaining a review petition is that the order, review of which is sought, suffers from any error apparent on the face of the order and permitting the order to stand will lead to failure of justice.
in the absence of any such error, finality attached to the judgment order cannot be disturbed.
9. the power of review can also be exercised by the court in the event discovery of new and important matter or evidence takes place which despite exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was made.
an application for review would also lie if the order has been passed on account of some mistake.
furthermore, an application for review shall also lie for any other sufficient reason.
10.
it is beyond any doubt or dispute that the review court does not sit in appeal over its own order.
a rehearing of the matter is impermissible in law.
it constitutes an exception to the general rule that once a judgment is signed or pronounced, it should not be altered.
it is also trite that exercise of inherent jurisdiction is not invoked for reviewing any order.
11. review is not appeal in disguise.
in lily thomas v. union of india this court held  scc p. 251, para 56  56.
it follows, therefore, that the power of review can be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute a view.
such powers can be exercised within the limits of the statute dealing with the exercise of power.
the review cannot be treated like an appeal in disguise.
7. the dictionary meaning of the word review is the act of looking, offer something again with a view to correction or improvement.
it cannot be denied that the review is the creation of a statute.
in the case of patel narshi thakershi vs. pradyumansinghji arjunsinghji,  1971  3 scc 844, this court has held that the power of review is not an inherent power.
it must be conferred by law either specifically or by necessary implication.
the review is also not an appeal in disguise.
8. what can be said to be an error apparent on the face of the proceedings has been dealt with and considered by this court in the case of t.c. basappa vs. t.nagappa, air 1954 sc 440.
it is held that such an error is an error which is a patent error and not a mere wrong decision.
in the case of hari vishnu kamath vs. ahmad ishaque, air 1955 sc 233, it is observed as under it is essential that it should be something more than a mere error it must be one which must be manifest on the face of the record.
the real difficulty with reference to this matter, however, is not so much in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case.
when does an error cease to be mere error, and become an error apparent on the face of the record?
learned counsel on either side were unable to suggest any clearcut rule by which the boundary between the two classes of errors could be demarcated.
8.1 in the case of parsion devi vs. sumitri devi,  supra  in paragraph 7 to 9 it is observed and held as under 7.
it is well settled that review proceedings have to be strictly confined to the ambit and scope of order 47 rule 1 cpc. in thungabhadra industries limited v. govt.
of a.p., air 1964 sc 1372 this court opined what, however, we are now concerned with is whether the statement in the order of september 1959 that the case did not involve any substantial question of law is an error apparent on the face of the record .
the fact that on the earlier occasion the court held on an identical state of facts that a substantial question of law arose would not per se be conclusive, for the earlier order itself might be erroneous.
similarly, even if the statement was wrong, it would not follow that it was an error apparent on the face of the record, for there is a distinction which is real, though it might not always be capable of exposition, between a mere erroneous decision and a decision which could be characterised as vitiated by error apparent.
a review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected, but lies only for pa