--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal original jurisdiction writ petition  criminal  number 57 of 2014 subrata roy sahara .
petitioner versus union of india and others .

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

respondents j u d g m e n t jagdish singh khehar, j. i. should we be hearing this case?
would it not be better, for another bench to hear this case?
1. in the present writ petition, the petitioner has made the following prayers-  a  declare the order dated 4.3.2014 as void, nullity and non-est in the eyes of law  b  declare that the incarceration and the custody of the petitioner are illegal which should be terminated forthwith  c  issue such other writ in the nature of habeas  corpus  or other writs, order or direction for release of the petitioner from the illegal custody.   d  pass such further orders as this honble court may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
a perusal of the prayers made in the writ petition reveals, that in sum and substance the petitioner has assailed the order dated 4.3.2014 passed by us in contempt petition  civil  numbers 412 and 413 of 2012 and contempt petition  civil  number 260 of 2013.
to understand the exact purport of the prayers made in the writ petition, it is essential to extract herein the order dated 4.3.2014, which is subject matter of challenge through the present criminal writ petition- 1. contemnors are personally present in the court, including the fifth respondent, who has been brought to the court by the u.p. police, in due execution of our non-bailable warrant of arrest.
2. we have heard the senior counsel on various occasions and perused the various documents, affidavits, etc.
we have heard the learned counsel and contemnors today as well.
we are fully convinced that the contemnors have not complied with our directions contained in the judgment dated august 31, 2012, as well as orders dated december 5, 2012 and february 25, 2013 passed in civil appeal number 8643 of 2012 and i.a. number 67 of 2013 by a three judge bench of this court.
3. sufficient opportunities have been given to the contemnors to fully comply with those orders and purge the contempt committed by them but, rather than availing of the same, they have adopted various dilatory tactics to delay the implementation of the orders of this court.
non-compliance of the orders passed by this court shakes the very foundation of our judicial system and undermines the rule of law, which we are bound to honour and protect.
this is essential to maintain faith and confidence of the people of this country in the judiciary.
4. we have found that the contemnors have maintained an unreasonable stand throughout the proceedings before sebi, sat, high court and even before this court.
reports analysis filed by sebi on 18.2.2014 make detailed reference to the submissions, documents, etc. furnished by the contemnors, which indicates that they are filing and making unacceptable statements and affidavits all through and even in the contempt proceedings.
documents and affidavits produced by the contemnors themselves would apparently falsify their refund theory and cast serious doubts about the existence of the so-called investors.
all the fact finding authorities have opined that majority of investors do not exist.
preservation of market integrity is extremely important for economic growth of this country and for national interest.
maintaining investors confidence requires market integrity and control of market abuse.
market abuse is a serious financial crime which undermines the very financial structure of this country and will make imbalance in wealth between haves and have nots.
5. we notice, on this day also, no proposal is forthcoming to honour the judgment of this court dated 31st august, 2012 and the orders passed by this court on december 05, 2012 and february 25, 2013 by the three judge bench.
in such circumstances, in exercise of the powers conferred under articles 129 and 142 of the constitution of india, we order detention of all the contemnors, except mrs. vandana bhargava  the fourth respondent  and send them to judicial custody at delhi, till the next date of hearing.
this concession is being extended towards the fourth respondent because she is a woman director, and also, to enable the contemnors to be in a position to propose an acceptable solution for execution of our orders, by coordinating with the detenues.
mrs. vandana bhargava, who herself is one of the directors, is permitted to be in touch with the rest of the contemnors and submit an acceptable proposal arrived at during their detention, so that the court can pass appropriate orders.
6. list on march 11, 2014 at 2.00 p.m.
all the contemnors be produced in court on that date.
mrs. vandana bhargava, the fourth respondent, to appear on her own.
however, liberty is granted for mentioning the matters for preponement of the date, if a concrete and acceptable proposal can be offered in the meantime.
2. when this matter came up for hearing for the first time on 12.3.2014, mr. ram jethmalani, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, sought liberty to make a frank and candid submission.
he told us, that it would be embarrassing for him, to canvass the submissions which he is bound to raise in the matter before us, i.e., before the bench as it was presently structured.
it was also his submission, that hearing this matter would also discomfort and embarrass us as well.
he therefore suggested, that we should recuse ourselves from hearing the case, and require it to be heard by another composition, not including either of us.
3. mr. arvind datar, learned senior counsel, appearing for the respondents, vociferously implored us not to withdraw ourselves from hearing the case.
it was his vigorous and emphatic contention, that the present petition was not maintainable, either under the provisions of the constitution of india, or under any other law of the land.
inviting the courts attention to the heading of the petition, it was submitted, that it did not disclose any legal provision, whereunder the present writ petition had been filed.
he submitted, that as per its own showing  ascertainable from the title of the petition , the present writ petition had been filed, under the power recognized and exercised by this court, in a.r. antulay v. r.s. nayak,  1988  2 scc 602.
it was the assertion of learned counsel, that the above judgment, has now been clarified by this court.
according to learned counsel, it has now been settled, that the above judgment did not fashion or create any such power or jurisdiction, as is sought to be invoked by the petitioner.
4. besides the above purely legal submission, learned senior counsel for the respondents equally candidly submitted, that the filing of this petition was a carefully engineered device, adopted by the petitioner as a stratagem, to seek our withdrawal from the matter.
in order to emphasise that this bench was being arm twisted, learned counsel invited our attention to the foot of the last page of the petition, i.e., to the authorship of the petition, just under the prayer clause.
the text, to which our attention was drawn, is set out below- signed and approved by- mr. ram jethmalani, sr.
adv. dr. rajeev dhawan, sr. adv.
mr. rakesh dwivedi, sr. adv.
mr. s. ganesh, sr. adv.
mr. ravi shankar prasad, sr.
adv.
according to learned counsel, this is the first petition he has seen in his entire professional career, which is settled by five senior counsel, all of them of recognized eminence.
5. it would be relevant to mention, that when the matter was taken up for hearing by us, for the first time on 12.3.2014 at 2.00 pm, it had been so listed on the directions of honble the chief justice in furtherance of a mentioning for listing, on the morning of the same day, i.e., 12.3.2014.
we had therefore, no occasion to go through the pleadings of the present writ petition.
after having heard submissions of rival counsel noticed above, we decided not to proceed with the matter, before going through the pleadings of the case.
we therefore directed the posting of the case for hearing on the following day, i.e., 13.3.2014.
6. by the next date, we had an opportunity to determine, how exactly the matter was listed before us, as also, to ascertain whether the pleadings of the present criminal writ petition incorporated material which would embarrass us, as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
so far as the filing and listing of the present petition is concerned, it was filed by the petitioner in the registry of this court on 11.3.2014.
thereafter, learned counsel for the petitioner, appeared before the bench presided over by honble the chief justice, on the morning of 12.3.2014 to mention for listing, for the same day.
the court master of the bench presided over by honble the chief justice, recorded the following note- as directed list today i.e., 12.3.2014, if in order, in the mentioning list at 2.00 pm, before appropriate bench.
for the concerned bench before which the matter was to be posted, the noting file of the branch, reads as under- apprised.
may be listed before the special bench comprising honble mr. justice k.s. radhakrishnan and honble mr. justice j.s. khehar.
the above note was recorded on the directions of honble the chief justice.
a perusal of the above sequence of events reveals, that even though our combination as a bench did not exist for 12.3.2014, yet a special bench was constituted for listing the present writ petition, in its present arrangement.
it is therefore reasonable to infer, that the present constitution of the bench, was a conscious determination of honble the chief justice.
7. now the embarrassment part.
having gone through the pleadings of the writ petition we were satisfied, that nothing expressed therein could be assumed, as would humiliate or discomfort us by putting us to shame.
to modify an earlier order passed by us, for a mistake we may have committed, which is apparent on the face of the record, is a jurisdiction we regularly exercise under article 137 of the constitution of india.
added to that, it is open to a party to file a curative petition as held by this court in rupa ashok hurra v. ashok hurra,  2002  4 scc 388.
these jurisdictions are regularly exercised by us, when made out, without any embarrassment.
correction of a wrong order, would never put anyone to shame.
recognition of a mistake, and its rectification, would certainly not put us to shame.
in our considered view, embarrassment would arise when the order assailed is actuated by personal and or extraneous considerations, and the pleadings record such an accusation.
no such allegation was made in the present writ petition.
and therefore, we were fully satisfied that the feeling entertained by the petitioner, that we would not pass an appropriate order, if the order impugned dated 4.3.2014 was found to be partly or fully unjustified, was totally misplaced.
8.
it is therefore, that we informed learned senior counsel, that we would hear the matter.
it seems that our determination to hear the matter marked to us by honble the chief justice, was not palatable to some of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
for, mr. ram jethmalani, learned senior counsel, was now more forthright.
he told us, that we should not hear the matter, because his client had apprehensions of prejudice.
he would, however, not spell out the basis for such apprehension.
dr. rajeev dhawan, came out all guns blazing, in support of his colleague, by posing a query has the court made a mistake, serious enough, giving rise to a presumption of bias even if it is not there ?
it was difficult to understand what he meant.
but seriously, in the manner dr. rajeev dhawan had addressed the court, it sounded like an insinuation.
mr. ram jethmalani joined in to inform us, that the bar  those sitting on the side he represented  was shell-shocked, that an order violating the petitioners rights under article 21 of the constitution of india, had been passed, and it did not seem to cause any concern to us.
the petitioner had been taken into judicial custody, we were told, without affording him any opportunity of hearing.
learned counsel asked the bench, to accept its mistake in ordering the arrest and detention of the petitioner, and acknowledge the human error committed by the court, while passing the impugned order dated 4.3.2014.
dr. rajeev dhawan, then informed the court, that moments come in the profession, though rarely, when we tell the judges of the supreme court, that you have committed a terrible terrible mistake, by passing an order which has violated the civil liberties of our client.
that the order passed is void .
and moments later, referring to the order, he said, it is a draconian order the seriousness of the submissions apart, none of them, even remotely, demonstrated bias.
9.
but mr. c.a. sundaram, another senior counsel representing the petitioner, distanced himself from the above submissions.
he informed the court, i am not invoking the doctrine of bias, as has been alleged we are of the view, that a genuine plea of bias alone, could have caused us to withdraw from the matter, and require it to be heard by some other bench.
detailed submissions on the allegations constituting bias, were addressed well after proceedings had gone on for a few weeks, the same have been dealt with separately  under heading viii, whether the impugned order dated 4.3.2014, is vitiated on account of bias? .
based on the submissions advanced by learned counsel, we could not persuade ourselves in accepting the prayer for recusal.
10.
we have recorded the above narration, lest we are accused of not correctly depicting the submissions, as they were canvassed before us.
in our understanding, the oath of our office, required us to go ahead with the hearing.
and not to be overawed by such submissions.
in our view, not hearing the matter, would constitute an act in breach of our oath of office, which mandates us to perform the duties of our office, to the best of our ability, without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
this is certainly not the first time, when solicitation for solicitation for recusal has been sought by learned counsel.
such a recorded peremptory prayer, was made by mr. r.k. anand, an eminent senior advocate, before the high court of delhi, seeking the recusal of mr. justice manmohan sarin from hearing his personal case.
mr. justice manmohan sarin while declining the request made by mr. r.k. anand, observed as under the path of recusal is very often a convenient and a soft option.
this is especially so since a judge really has no vested interest in doing a particular matter.
however, the oath of office taken under article 219 of the constitution of india enjoins the judge to duly and faithfully and to the best of his knowledge and judgment, perform the duties of office without fear or favour, affection or ill will while upholding the constitution and the laws.
in a case, where unfounded and motivated allegations of bias are sought to be made with a view of forum hunting bench preference or brow-beating the court, then, succumbing to such a pressure would tantamount to not fulfilling the oath of office.
the above determination of the high court of delhi was assailed before this court in r.k. anand v. delhi high court,  2009  8 scc 106.
the determination of the high court whereby mr. justice manmohan sarin declined to withdraw from the hearing of the case came to be upheld, with the following observations the above passage, in our view, correctly sums up what should be the courts response in the face of a request for recusal made with the intent to intimidate the court or to get better of an inconvenient judge or to obfuscate the issues or to cause obstruction and delay the proceedings or in any other way frustrate or obstruct the course of justice.   emphasis is ours  11.
in fact, the observations of the high court of delhi and those of this court reflected, exactly how it felt, when learned counsel addressed the court, at the commencement of the hearing.
if it was learned counsels posturing antics, aimed at bench-hunting or bench-hopping  or should we say, bench-avoiding , we would not allow that.
affronts, jibes and carefully and consciously planned snubs could not deter us, from discharging our onerous responsibility.
we could at any time, during the course of hearing, walk out and make way, for another bench to decide the matter, if ever we felt that, that would be the righteous course to follow.
whether or not, it would be better for another bench to hear this case, will emerge from the conclusions, we will draw, in the course of the present determination.
12.
what is it that this court had done through its order dated 31.8.2012 while upholding the earlier orders passed by the sebi  ftm   dated 23.6.2011  and the sat  dated 18.10.2011 ?
we had merely confirmed the directions earlier issued to the two companies, to refund the moneys collected by them from investors, who had subscribed to their ofcds, by the sebi  ftm  and by the sat.
the directions did not extend to funds contributed by the promoters, the directors or the other stakeholders.
the refund did not include any business gains earned by the two companies during the subsistence of their enterprise.
according to the stance adopted by the two companies before this court, all the investors money collected through ofcds, had mainly been invested with the other companies of the sahara group.
this position was expressly reiterated, in the two separate affidavits filed by sahara india real estate corporation limited  hereinafter referred to as sirecl  and sahara housing investment corporation limited  hereinafter referred to as shicl  dated 4.1.2012, before this court.
it is now their case, that these properties were sold to other sahara group companies to redeem the ofcds.
it is therefore all within the companies of the sahara group.
that is how, sale transactions by way of cash have been explained.
it is therefore apparent, that we had not directed a refund of any other amount, besides that which was collected from the investors themselves.
the petitioner herein mr. subrata roy sahara, during the course of his personal oral hearing informed us, that most of the investments were made by petty peasants, labourers, cobblers, blacksmiths, woodcutters and other such like artisans, ranging mostly between rs.2,000/- and rs.3,000/-.
almost all the investors, according to the petitioner, did not even have a bank account.
that was why, they had chosen to invest the same through ofcds, in the two companies.
if the above position was is correct, and the refund related only to deposits made by these petty poor citizens of this country, why are the two companies or the petitioner mr. subrata roy sahara, in his capacity as promoter, and the other concerned directors, so agitated with our order.
the findings against the two companies have been concurrent.
at all levels, where issues raised by the two companies were considered and agitated, the determination has been in one voice, that the action of the two companies was unlawful and accordingly the moneys collected had to be refunded.
there is not even a single order at any level, in favour of the two companies.
the two companies were required to refund the money to its investors, because of the absolute illegality in its collection.
13.
because both the sebi and the sat were doubtful about the veracity of the receipt of the funds as alleged, they had directed the refund to the investors by way of cash through demand draft or pay order.
during the course of final hearing of the appellate proceedings before this court, submissions were heard over a period of three weeks during the summer vacation.
we entertained a similar impression and suspicion.
firstly because, the two companies never made available any information sought from them.
they always stonewalled all attempts to gather information by the sebi, even by exerting influence from the ministry of corporate affairs, and by raising purely technical pleas.
and also because, the little bits of information made available by the companies for evaluation, were found to be seriously doubtful.
it is also important for us to record, that the pointed position adopted by the sebi before this court, during the disposal of civil appeal numbers 9813 and 9833 of 2011 was, that neither sirecl, nor shicl, ever provided details of its investors to the sebi  ftm .
they contested the proceedings initiated by the sebi  ftm , only on technical grounds.
we were told that even before the sat, no details were furnished.
the position remained the same, even before this court.
based on the non disclosure of information sought from the two companies, it was not possible to record a firm finding, either ways.
it is, therefore, that a different procedure was adopted by this court while disposing the appeals preferred by the two companies, vide order dated 31.8.2012.
the companies were restrained from making direct refunds.
they were directed to deposit all investor related funds  along with interest  with the sebi.
the sebi was in turn directed, to make the refunds to the investors.
in case the investors could not be identified, or were found to be non-existent or bogus, the remaining funds along with interest, were directed to be deposited with the government of india.
this seems to us, to be the reason, for all these twists and turns, in the aftermath of this courts order dated 31.8.2012.
if the two companies were ready and willing to pay the money, as has been made out, on behalf of the two companies, there would be no cause for agitation.
14.
one of the reasons for retaining the instant petition for hearing with ourselves was, that we had heard eminent senior counsel engaged by the two companies exclusively for over three weeks during the summer vacation of 2012.
we had been taken through thousands of pages of pleadings.
we had the occasion to watch the demeanour and defences adopted by the two companies and the contemnors from time to time, from close quarters.
writing the judgment, had occupied the entire remaining period of the summer vacation of 2012, as also, about two months of further time.
the judgment dated 31.8.2012 runs into 269 printed pages.
both of us had rendered separate judgments, concurring with one another, on each aspect of the matter.
during the course of writing the judgment, we had the occasion to minutely examine numerous communications, exchanged between the rival parties.
that too had resulted in a different kind of understanding, about the controversy.
for any other bench to understand the nuances of the controversy determined through our order dated 31.8.2012, would require prolonged hearing of the matter.
months of time, just in the same manner as we had taken while passing the order dated 31.8.2012, would have to be spent again.
possibly the submissions made by the learned counsel seeking our recusal, was consciously aimed at the above objective.
was this the reason for the theatrics, of some of the learned senior counsel?
difficult to say for sure.
but deep within, dont we all understand?
it was also for the sake of saving precious time of this court, that we decided to bear the brunt and the rhetoric, of some of the learned senior counsel representing the petitioner.
we are therefore satisfied, that it would not be better, for another bench to hear this case.
ii.
must judicial orders be obeyed at all costs?
can a judicial order be disregarded, if the person concerned feels, that the order is wholly illegal and void?
15. by the time a judge is called upon to serve on the bench of the supreme court of india, he understands his responsibilities and dutiesand also his powers and authority.
a judge has the solemn duty of deciding conflicting issues between rival parties.
rival parties inevitably claim diagonally opposite rights.
the decision has however to be rendered in favour of one party  and against the other .
that, however, is not a cause for much worry, because a judge is to decide every dispute, in consonance with law.
if one is not free to decide in consonance with his will, but must decide in consonance with law, the concept of a judge being an individual possessing power and authority, is but a delusion.
the saving grace is, that only a few understand this reality.
but what a judge is taught during his arduous and onerous journey to the supreme court is, that his calling is based on, the faith and confidence reposed in him to serve his country, its institutions and citizens.
each one of the above  the country, its institutions and citizens , needs to be preserved.
each of them grows to prosper, with the others support.
each of them has duties, obligations and responsibilitiesand also rights, benefits and advantages.
their harmonious glory, emerges from, what is commonly understood as, the rule of law.
the judiciary as an institution, has extremely sacrosanct duties, obligations and responsibilities.
we shall, in the succeeding paragraphs, attempt to express these, in a formal perspective.
16.
the president of india is vested with executive power of the union.
all executive actions of the government of india, are expressed to be taken in his name.
the responsibility, and the power, which is vested in the president of india, is to be discharged exercised, in accordance with the provisions of the constitution of india.
for that, the president of india may even consult the supreme court, on a question of law or fact of public importance.
and when so consulted, the supreme court is obliged to tender its opinion to the president.
furthermore, the constitution of india contemplates, that law declared by the supreme court, is binding on all courts within the territory of india.
it also mandates, that an order made by the supreme court, is enforceable throughout the territory of india.
but what is the scope of the law declared by the supreme court?
and what are the kinds of orders it passes?
the supreme court has been vested with the power to decide substantial questions of law, as also, to interpret the provisions of the constitution of india.
the supreme court exercises jurisdiction to determine, whether or not, laws made by parliament or by a state legislature, are consistent with the provisions of the constitution of india.
and in case any legislation is found to be enacted, in violation of the provisions of the constitution of india, this court is constrained to strike it down.
the resultant effect is, that a law enacted by the parliament or by a state legislature, is declared illegal or void.
after a courts verdict has attained finality, not once, never and never, has any legislative body ever disobeyed or disrespected an order passed by a court, declaring a legislation, illegal or void.
the supreme court also exercises original jurisdiction, to settle disputes between the government of india and one or more states or between the government of india and any one state or more states on the one side, and one or more other states on the other or between two or more states.
in such disputes, the order could be in favour of  or against , the government of india, and or one or the other state government s  concerned.
yet, the orders passed by the supreme court on the above disputes, have unfailingly been accepted and complied with, despite the seriousness of the consequences, emerging from such orders.
the settlement of such disputes by the supreme court, has not ever earned scorn, disdain, disrespect or denigration of the parties concerned.
the supreme court also enforces through its writ jurisdiction, fundamental rights of the citizens of this country.
in case an individuals fundamental rights  or other legal rights , are found to have been violated, the government of india, or the concerned state government, or the instrumentality institution concerned, is directed to restore to the individual, what is due to him.
the government  or the instrumentality institution  concerned, which is directed to extend benefits denied to an individual s , has always honourably obeyed and implemented court orders, gracefully.
there are numerous institutions created to assist the executive government, in matters of governance.
some of them are constitutional authorities, others are creatures, either of a legislation or of the executive.
the object of executive governance, is to enforce duties, obligations and responsibilities, and also, to extend rights, benefits and advantages.
courts also exercise, the power of judicial review, over actions of such instrumentalities institutions.
while exercising the power of judicial review, courts also pass orders and directions, to enforce legal rights.
courts are rarely confronted with a situation where an executive department of a government, or an instrumentality institution, has denied compliance.
likewise, the supreme court is also vested with the responsibility to adjudicate private disputes between individuals  both civil and criminal , so as to render a determination of their individual rights.
these too, are as a rule  almost  always complied with voluntarily and gracefully.
17.
there is no escape from, acceptance, or obedience, or compliance of an order passed by the supreme court, which is the final and the highest court, in the country.
where would we find ourselves, if the parliament or a state legislature insists, that a statutory provision struck down as unconstitutional, is valid?
or, if a decision rendered by the supreme court, in exercise of its original jurisdiction, is not accepted for compliance, by either the government of india, and or one or the other state government s  concerned?
what if, the concerned government or instrumentality, chooses not to give effect to a court order, declaring the fundamental right of a citizen?
or, a determination rendered by a court to give effect to a legal right, is not acceptable for compliance?
where would we be, if decisions on private disputes rendered between private individuals, are not complied with?
the answer though preposterous, is not far fetched.
in view of the functional position of the supreme court depicted above, non-compliance of its orders, would dislodge the cornerstone maintaining the equilibrium and equanimity in the countrys governance.
there would be a breakdown of constitutional functioning.
it would be a mayhem of sorts.
18.
before we advert to the question, whether this court can order obedience of an order passed by it, it may be relevant to understand, the extent and width of jurisdiction, within the framework whereof this court can pass orders.
in this behalf reference may be made to the nine-judge constitution bench judgment of this court, in naresh sridhar mirajkar v. state of maharashtra, air 1967 sc 1, wherein it was held as under- 60.
there is yet another aspect of this matter to which it is necessary to refer.
the high court is a superior court of record and under article215, shall have all powers of such a court of record including the power to punish contempt of itself.
one distinguishing characteristic of such superior courts is that they are entitled to consider questions of their jurisdiction raised before them.
this question fell to be considered by this court in special reference number 1 of 1964, 1965  1 s.c.r.
413 at p. 499.
in that case, it was urged before this court that in granting bail to keshav singh, the high court had exceeded its jurisdiction and as such, the order was a nullity.
rejecting this argument, this court observed that in the case of a superior court of record, it is for the court to consider whether any matter falls within its jurisdiction or not.
unlike a court of limited jurisdiction, the superior court is entitled to determine for itself questions about its own jurisdiction.
that is why this court did not accede to the proposition that in passing the order for interim bail, the high court can be said to have exceeded its jurisdiction with the result that the order in question was null and void.
in support of this view, this court cited a passage from halsburys laws of england where it is observed that- prima facie, no matter is deemed to be beyond the jurisdiction of a superior court unless it is expressly shown to be so, while nothing is within the jurisdiction of an inferior court unless it is expressly shown on the face of the proceedings that the particular matter is within the cognizance of the particular court.   halsburys laws of england, vol. 9, p. 349  if the decision of a superior court on a question of its jurisdiction is erroneous, it can, of course, be corrected by appeal or revision as may be permissible under the law but until the adjudication by a superior court on such a point is set aside by adopting the appropriate course, it would