--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable inthesupremecourtofindia criminalappellatejurisdiction criminalappealno.1569of2018  arisingoutofs.l.p.
crl.
number10034of2018  lajpators.
.appellant s  versus stateofuttarpradeshanr.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

.respondent s   judgment abhaymanoharsapre,j. 1. leavegranted.
2. thisappealisfiledagainstthefinaljudgment and order dated 10.09.2018 passed by the high courtofjudicatureatallahabadinanapplication signature not verified digitally signed by anita malhotra date 2018.12.07 145406 ist reason number35of2017filedundersection482ofthecodeof criminalprocedure,1973 hereinafterreferredtoas the code  whereby the single judge of the high court dismissed the application filed by the appellantsherein.
3. fewfactsneedmentioninfratoappreciatethe shortcontroversyinvolvedinthisappeal.
4. by impugned order, the single judge of the high court dismissed the appellants application filed under section 482 of the code wherein the challenge was to quash charge sheet number1 dated 07.05.2016in casecrimeno.441of2015 under sections 420, 406 and 504 of the indian penal code, 1860  hereinafter referred to as ipc , p.s. khair, district aligarh in case number486 of 2016  state vs.lajpators.
pending inthecourtof judicialmagistrate,khair,aligarh.
5. the short question, which arises for consideration in this appeal, is whether the high court was justified in dismissing the appellants applicationfiledundersection482ofthecode.
6. heardmr.siddharthmittal, learnedcounsel for the appellants.
mr. manoj mishra, learned counselwasaskedtotakenoticeforthestate.
7. having heard the learned counsel for the partiesandonperusaloftherecordofthecase,we are inclined to set aside the impugned order and remandthecasetothehighcourtfordecidingthe appellants application, out of which this appeal arises,afreshonmeritsinaccordancewithlawafter noticetootherside.
8. onperusaloftheimpugnedorder,wefindthat thesinglejudgehasonlyquotedtheprinciplesof law laid down by this court in several decisions relatingtopowersofthehighcourttointerferein thecasesfiledundersection482ofthecodefrom para2totheconcludingparabuthasfailedtoeven refer to the facts of the case with a view to appreciatethefactualcontroversy,suchas,whatis the nature of the complaint fir filed against the appellants,theallegationsonwhichitisfiled,who filed it, the grounds on which the complaint fir proceedings is challenged by the appellants, why such grounds are not made out undersection482ofthecodeetc. 9.
weare,therefore,atalosstoknowthefactual matrixofthecasemuchlesstoappreciateexceptto readthelegalprincipleslaiddownbythiscourtin severaldecisions.
10. in our view, the single judge ought to have firstsetoutthebrieffactsofthecasewithaviewto understandthefactualmatrixofthecaseandthen examinedthechallengemadetotheproceedingsin thelightoftheprinciplesoflawlaiddownbythis courtandthenrecordedhisfindingastoonwhat basis and reasons, a case is made out for any interferenceornot.
11. inourview,thisistheleastthatisrequiredin every order to support the conclusion reached for disposalofthecase.itenablesthehighercourtto examinethequestionastowhetherthereasoning given by the court below is factually and legally sustainable.
12.
wefindthattheaforementionedexercisewas not done by the high court while passing the impugnedorderandhenceinterferenceiscalledfor.
13.
we,therefore,findourselvesunabletoconcur with such disposal of the application by the high court and feel inclinedtosetasidethe impugned orderandremandthecasetothehighcourt single judge  with a request to decide the application afreshonmeritsinaccordancewithlawkeepingin viewtheaforementionedobservationsafterissuing noticetorespondentnos.1and2.
14.
havingformedanopiniontoremandthecase inthelightofourreasoning,wedonotconsiderit propertogointothemeritsofthecase.
15. inviewoftheforegoingdiscussion,theappeal succeeds and is accordingly allowed.
impugned orderissetaside.thecaseisremandedtothehigh courtforitsdecisiononmeritsuninfluencedbyany ofourobservationsinthisorderafternoticetothe respondents.
j. abhaymanoharsapre .j.
indumalhotra newdelhi december06,2018