--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india criminal appellate jurisdicition criminal appeal numbers791-792 of 2005 sheo shankar singh appellant versus state of jharkhand anr.
respondents with criminal appeal numbers793-794 of 2005 umesh singh appellant versus state of jharkhand anr.
respondents judgment t.s. thakur, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

these appeals by special leave are directed against a common judgment and order dated 6th may, 2005 passed by the high court of jharkhand at ranchi whereby the conviction of appellant-sheo shankar singh under section 302 read with section 34 ipc and that of appellant-umesh singh under section 302 read with section 34 ipc and section 27 of the arms act have been confirmed and the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for life imposed upon the said two appellants by the trial court enhanced to the sentence of death.
criminal revision petition number136 of 2004 seeking enhancement of sentence imposed upon umesh singh and sheo shankar singh has been consequently allowed by the high court while criminal revision petition number135 of 2004 filed against the acquittal of three other accused persons md.
zahid, premjeet singh and uma shankar singh dismissed.
2. briefly stated the prosecution case is that on 14th april, 2000, the deceased-shri gurudas chatterjee, a sitting member of jharkhand state legislative assembly was returning to nirsa from dhanbad riding the pillion seat of a motorcycle that was being driven by the first informant apurba ghosh, examined at the trial as pw 16.
at about 2.45 p.m. when the duo reached a place near premier hard coke, apurba ghosh, the informant heard the sound of a gunshot from behind.
he looked back only to find that appellant-sheo shankar singh was driving a black motorcycle on the left of the informant with an unknown person, later identified as umesh singh, sitting on the pillion seat carrying a pistol in his hand.
umesh singh, the pillion rider, is alleged to have fired a second time from close range which hit the deceased-gurudas chatterjee in the head, who slumped on the back of the informant thereby disturbing the balance of the motorcycle and bringing both of them to the ground.
the motorcycle driven by sheo shanker singh was stopped by him a little ahead whereupon umesh singh the pillion rider got down walked back to the place where the deceased had fallen, abused the informant verbally and asked him to run away from there failing which even he would be killed.
so threatened the informant hurried away from the spot whereupon umesh singh-appellant fired a third bullet at the deceased, pushed his dead body down the side slope of the road, walked back to the motorcycle whose engine was kept running by sheo shankar singh and fled towards nirsa.
some people are said to have run towards them but were scared away by umesh singh with the gun.
the motorcycle did not have a registration number.
a crowd is said to have gathered on the spot that included abdul kudus ansari  pw1  and lal mohan mahto  pw2  who disclosed that they had seen sheo shankar singh and one unknown person moving on a motorcycle without a registration number sometime before the occurrence.
3. on hearing a rumour about the killing of the deceased mla, sub inspector of police ramji prasad  pw17  rushed to the spot and recorded the statement of apurba ghosh  pw16  in which the informant narrated the details of the incident as set out above.
the statement of apurba ghosh constituted the first information report in the case which was signed not only by apurba ghosh but also by abdul kudus ansari  pw1  and lal mohan mahto  pw2 .
based on the said statement fir a case under section 302/34 and 120b of ipc and section 27 of the arms act was registered in police station govindpur and the investigation commenced.
4. in the course of the investigation an inquest report was prepared by bdo, shishir kumar sinha, while the investigating officer seized two empties of 9 m.m. bullet engraved with hp 59/2 at the bottom from the spot, apart from the red hero honda splendour motorcycle bearing registration number wb 38 e 7053 on which the deceased was travelling at the time of occurrence.
blood-stained t shirt and a light blue coloured jeans worn by apurba ghosh were also seized, besides blood-stained earth from the place of occurrence.
5. on 15th april, 2000 investigation was taken over by shri raja ram prasad  pw18  who on 16th april, 2000 seized the black coloured bajaj caliber motorcycle allegedly being driven by appellant-sheo shankar singh at the time of the commission of the offence.
in addition, a test identification parade was got conducted in which abdul qudus ansari  pw1  identified the accused appellant-umesh singh.
after completion of the investigation a charge-sheet was eventually filed against the accused persons for offences punishable under section 302/34/120b and 201 of the indian penal code.
appellant-umesh singh was further charged with an offence punishable under section 27 of the arms act.
the accused were committed to the court of sessions at dhanbad who made the case over to the court of additional sessions judge xiii, dhanbad for trial before whom the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed a trial.
6. at the trial the prosecution examined 20 witnesses while the accused remained content with two in defence.
the trial court by its judgment dated 18th november, 2003 found the appellants sheo shankar singh and umesh singh guilty of the charges under section 302/34 ipc.
appellant- umesh singh was further held guilty of the charge under section 27 of the arms act.
out of the remaining six accused persons, the trial court found narmedeshwar pd.
singh chora master, bijay singh and md.
nooren master guilty of the charge under section 302 read with section 120b of the ipc.
accused uma shankar singh, premjee singh and md.
zahid were, however, acquitted for insufficiency of evidence against them.
7. by a separate order dated 20th november, 2003 passed by the trial court, appellants sheo shanker singh and umesh singh were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
appellant-umesh singh was in addition sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years under section 27 of the arms act.
similarly, accused narmedeshwar pd.
singh chora master, bijay singh and md.
nooren master were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life under section 302/120b ipc.
8. aggrieved by their conviction and sentence, the appellants herein and the other three convicts filed criminal appeals number43 and 78 of 2004 before the high court of jharkhand at ranchi.
criminal revision petition number135 of 2004 was filed by apurba ghosh against the acquittal of accused uma shankar singh, premjeet singh and md.
zahid, while criminal revision petition number136 of 2004 prayed for enhancement of the sentence imposed upon the appellants from life to death.
9. by the judgment and order impugned in these appeals the high court acquitted narmedeshwar pd.
singh chora master, bijay singh and md.
nooren master and allowed criminal appeals number43 and 78 to that extent.
the conviction of appellants sheo shankar singh and umesh singh was upheld by the high court and the sentence imposed upon them enhanced to the sentence of death by hanging.
criminal revision petition number135 of 2004 against the acquittal of uma shankar singh, premjeet singh and md.
zahid was, however, dismissed and their acquittal affirmed.
the present appeals assail the correctness of the said judgment and order as noticed above.
10.
we have heard mr. u.r. lalit, learned senior counsel for the appellants, mr. a.t.m. rangaramanujam and mr. sunil kumar, learned senior counsels appearing for the respondents at considerable length.
we have also been taken through the evidence on record and the judgments of the courts below.
we shall presently advert to the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties but before we do so we may at the outset point out that the cause of death of late shri gurudas chatterjee being homicidal was not disputed and in our view rightly so.
that is because the evidence on record amply proves that the deceased died of gunshot injuries sustained by him in the head.
the deposition of dr. shailender kumar  pw14  who conducted the post-mortem examination of the deceased along with two other doctors viz.
prof.
dr. rai sudhir prasad, and dr. chandra shekhar prasad leaves no manner of doubt that the death of shri gurudas chaterjee was the result of two ante-mortem gunshot wounds, which the witness has described as under in his deposition in the court and the post-mortem report, ex.5 i. fire arm wound of entrance cm x cm cavity deep with inverted margins and abrasion collar located on the front of upper portion of left side of face about 1.5 cm in front of pinna of left ear.
no burning, singing or tattooing were seen.
ii. fire arm exit wound 1 cm x cm cavity deep with inverted margins placed 2.5 cm above the mid zone of right eye brow.
no evidence of abrasion collar seen.
iii.fire arm wound of entrance cm diameter, cavity deep with inverted margins and abrasion collar on left side of back of head in prito occipital area 5 cm away from left ear low.
no burning, singing or tattooing were seen.
iv.
fire arm exit wounds cm diameter cavity deep with inverted margins and protruding brain matter in the left side of back of head in perito occipital area 2 cm away from left ear low.
no abrasion collar was seen.
injury numberiv is the exit wound of injury number1 and injury number2 is exit wound of injury number3 as it was confirmed by the track of blood clot and laceration found in dissection.
v. lacerated wounds a  1cm x cm x scalp deep on the right side of forehead, 6 cm above the inner end of right eye brow.
b  cm x cm x scalp deep on occuipttal.
vi. abrasions a  1- cm x cm on middle of left side of forehead.
b  2 cm x 1 cm with tail of 3 cm x cm horizontally placed on back of right shoulder.
c  cm linear abrasion of 9 cm x 1/3 cm horizontally placed on back of lower portion of left side of chest.
d  2 cm x cm on back of left side flank of abdomen.
on dissection multiple fractures of frontal and both parietal bones were found stomach contain about 100 m.l. semi digested rice and sag.
all viscera were pale, heart and bladder empty.
opinion in our opinion death occurred instantaneously due to aforementioned cranio - cerebral injuries resulting from the fire arm.
time elapsed since death - between 18 and 24 hrs.
before the time of post-mortem.
11. in the light of the above there is no gainsaying that the deceased died a homicidal death caused by gunshot injuries.
apart from the fact that cause of the homicidal death was never questioned by the accused before the trial court, the appellate court or even before us, the line of cross- examination of the doctor who conducted the post-mortem examination too does not question the veracity of the opinion of the medical expert that the deceased had died because of the gunshot injuries received by him.
it is true that the doctor has not been able to specifically state which of the two gunshot injuries had proved fatal, but that in our opinion is wholly inconsequential, having regard to the sequence of events unfolded by the deposition of the witnesses examined at the trial.
12.
coming then to the substratum of the prosecution case we need point out that the same rests entirely on the ocular testimony of apruva ghosh  pw16  and prasant banerjee  pw6 , apart from the incriminating circumstances called in aid by the prosecution to lend support and corroboration to the testimony of the said two eye-witnesses.
we shall take up for discussion the deposition of the said witnesses, but before we do so we may deal with the question whether the prosecution has proved any motive for the commission of the crime alleged against the appellants and if so to what effect.
13.
the legal position regarding proof of motive as an essential requirement for bringing home the guilt of the accused is fairly well settled by a long line of decisions of this court.
these decisions have made a clear distinction between cases where prosecution relies upon circumstantial evidence on the one hand and those where it relies upon the testimony of eye witnesses on the other.
in the former category of cases proof of motive is given the importance it deserves, for proof of a motive itself constitutes a link in the chain of circumstances upon which the prosecution may rely.
proof of motive, however, recedes into the background in cases where the prosecution relies upon an eye-witness account of the occurrence.
that is because if the court upon a proper appraisal of the deposition of the eye-witnesses comes to the conclusion that the version given by them is credible, absence of evidence to prove the motive is rendered inconsequential.
conversely even if prosecution succeeds in establishing a strong motive for the commission of the offence, but the evidence of the eye-witnesses is found unreliable or unworthy of credit, existence of a motive does not by itself provide a safe basis for convicting the accused.
that does not, however, mean that proof of motive even in a case which rests on an eye-witness account does not lend strength to the prosecution case or fortify the court in its ultimate conclusion.
proof of motive in such a situation certainly helps the prosecution and supports the eye- witnesses.
see shivaji genu mohite v. the state of maharashtra,  1973  3 scc 219, hari shanker v. state of u.p.  1996  9 scc 40 and state of uttar pradesh v. kishanpal and ors.   2008  16 scc 73.
14.
the case at hand rests upon the deposition of the eyewitnesses to the occurrence.
absence of motive would not, therefore, by itself make any material difference.
but if a motive is indeed proved it would lend support to the prosecution version.
the question is whether the prosecution has established any such motive to fortify its charge against the appellants.
15. depositions of apurba ghosh  pw16 , aamlal kisku  pw15  and arup chatterjee  pw19  are relevant on the question of motive and may be briefly discussed at this stage.
arup chatterjee  pw19  happens to be the son of the deceased gurudas chatterjee.
according to this witness the appellants and most of their family members constitute what is described by him as coal mafia of dhanbad whom the deceased used to fight, with the help of the police and administration to prevent the theft of coal in the region.
the witness further states that aamlal kisku had a petrol pump situate at belchadi, which petrol pump was given by shri kisku to the accused-sheo shanker singh for being run.
aamlal kisku being an illiterate adivasi was, according to the witness, being kept as a bonded  bandhua  labourer by the appellant on payment of rs.30/- per day.
the witness further states that aamlal kisku approached the deceased for help and the later with the help of police and administration got the ownership of the petrol pump restored to shri kisku.
both these steps namely prevention of theft of coal in the region and restoration of the petrol pump to aamlal kisku annoyed the appellant-sheo shanker singh, for which reason the deceased was done to death after he had won his third consecutive election to the state assembly.
16. in cross-examination the witness has expressed his ignorance about the land where the petrol pump was installed and about the source of income of aamlal kisku.
the witness also expressed ignorance about the expenditure involved in the installation of the pump or the source from where shri kisku had arranged finances.
the witness stated that criminal cases were pending before the court against sheo shanker singh and narmedeshwar pd.
singh and his sons, but expressed ignorance about filing of the civil suit by narmadeshwar singh regarding the petrol pump in dispute.
witness claimed to have heard a conversation between aamlal kisku and the deceased regarding the dispute over the petrol pump.
17.
aamlal kisku  pw15  has, in his deposition, stated that he owns a petrol pump in belchadi which was allotted to him out of the advasi quota.
since he was not familiar with the business in the sale of oil and lubricants he had taken help from narmedeshwar pd.
singh and sheo shanker singh.
subsequently sheo shanker singh-appellant started treating him like a labourer and did not render any accounts regarding the petrol pump.
he, therefore, made complaints to the company and approached late gurudas chatterjee mla, and it was after long efforts that the petrol pump was restored to the witness.
sheo shankar singh and narmedeshwar pd.
singh had extended threats to him regarding which he had informed the police.
18. in cross-examination the witness stated that the business of petrol pump was carried on by him in partnership with sheo shanker singh for 4-5 months in the year 1997.
no partnership-deed was, however, written.
he did not know whether any joint account with the appellants had been opened in poddardih branch of allahabad bank.
he also did not know whether sales tax registration was in joint names and whether the land belonged to sheo shankar singh.
the witness admits that he had lodged a criminal case against sheo shankar singh, rama shanker singh and rajesh singh and that another case was filed against narmedeshwar pd.
singh also.
the witness denied that the petrol pump had been installed with the help of the money provided by sheo shanker singh and narmedeshwar pd.
singh and that the cases referred to by him had been lodged against the said two persons on the incitement of others.
19. apurba ghosh  pw16  apart from being an eye-witness to the incident also mentions about a petrol pump situated on g.t. road at nirsa owned by a person belonging to scheduled tribe community but was being run by narmedeshwar pd.
singh illegally.
the deceased fought against them with the help of police and local administration because of which the ownership of the petrol pump was got restored to the owner concerned.
the witness also refers to a statement made by the deceased regarding coal theft 5 or 6 days before the incident in question as a result whereof narmedeshwar pd.
singh and nooren master were both sent to jail.
20.
there is thus evidence to prove that a petrol pump situated at g.t. road at nirsa stood in the name of aamlal kisku which had been allotted in his name in the scheduled tribes quota.
it is also evident that to establish and run the said petrol pump aamlal kisku had taken the help from shri narmedeshwar pd.
singh and sheo shankar singh.
disputes between the original allottee and the appellant-sheo shankar singh and his father narmedeshwar pd.
singh had, however, arisen and manifested in the form of civil and criminal cases between them.
aamlal kisku had in that connection taken the help of the deceased who had with the help of the police and local administration secured the restoration of the petrol pump to shri kisku which annoyed the appellant-sheo shankar singh and his father narmedeshwar pd.
singh.
there is also evidence to the effect that the deceased had acted against what has been described as coal mafia of dhanbad with the help of police and administration to prevent the coal theft in the region and the steps taken by the deceased had resulted in the arrest of narmedeshwar pd.
singh and nooren master in connection with the said cases.
both these circumstances appear to have contributed to the incident that led to the killing of the deceased who was perceived by the appellants as a hurdle in their activities.
21.
that brings us to the most critical part of the case in which we shall examine whether the prosecution has proved beyond a reasonable doubt, the sequence of events on which is based the charge of murder levelled against the appellants.
the evidence adduced by the prosecution in this regard comprises the following distinct features  i  evidence suggesting that on the date of occurrence and proximate in point of time the appellants were seen together riding a black coloured motor cycle, without a registration number.   ii  evidence establishing seizure of the motor cycle on which the deceased was riding from the place of occurrence and that which was being driven by appellant-sheo shankar singh from his factory.   iii  the eye witness account of the occurrence as given by shri apurva ghosh pw16 and shri prabshant banerjee pw6.   iv  medical evidence, supporting the version of pw 16, that he sustained injuries when he fell from the motor cycle being driven by him on the deceased who was on the pillion being shot by appellant umesh singh.
we propose to deal with each one of the above aspects ad seriatim.
22.
abdul kudus ansari  pw1 , in his deposition before the trial court stated that on 14th april, 2000 i.e. the date of occurrence while he was at amona turn  mod in hindi  he saw appellant-sheo shankar singh going towards nirsa on a caliber motorcycle at about 11.15 a.m.
the witness further states that he was at amona mod till around 1 p.m.-1.15 p.m. when he saw appellant-sheo shankar singh going towards gobindpur on a motorcycle with another person on the pillion seat.
at about 2.45 p.m. when he was at his house, he heard that the deceased m.l.a. had been murdered.
he reached the spot where some persons were already present.
the person who was driving the motorcycle on which the deceased was riding said that appellant-sheo shanker singh was driving the motorcycle while the person sitting behind had fired the shots.
in a test identification parade the witness claims to have identified appellant- umesh singh as the person whom he had seen on the pillion seat of the motorcycle driven by appellant-sheo shankar singh on the date of the occurrence.
the witness was extensively cross-examined by the defence, but there is nothing in the deposition which would render the version given by him doubtful and unworthy or credence.
the fact that the witness is a signatory to the statement of apurba ghosh  pw16 , which statement was recorded by the investigating officer on 14th april, 2000 at about 4.15 p.m. only shows that he had indeed reached the place of occurrence immediately after hearing about the killing of the deceased as stated by him in his deposition in the court and that he had not only offered but actually identified the pillion rider in the test identification parade.
23.
to the same effect is the deposition of lal mohan mahto  pw2  who in his deposition stated that on 14th april, 2000 at about 11 a.m. he saw the deceased going towards dhanbad on a motorcycle, who told him to stay near the party office at ratanpur.
after some time he saw appellant- sheo shanker singh riding a motorcycle without a registration number and going towards nirsa.
around 1.30 p.m.
again he saw the said appellant going towards govindpur by the same motorcycle with one other person sitting on the pillion seat.
around 3 p.m. there was a hue and cry that m.l.a.
shri gurudas chatterjee had been killed.
he reached the g.t. road at deoli and found the deceased soaked in blood.
apurva ghosh  pw16  told the witness that while appellant-sheo shanker singh was driving the motorcycle the person sitting behind had fired the bullet that killed the deceased.
the witness identified the appellant- sheo shanker singh as the person who was driving the motorcycle and appellant-umesh singh as the person who was sitting on the pillion seat.
24. in cross-examination this witness has, inter alia, stated that he reached the place of occurrence on hearing the noise about the killing of the deceased.
there was a crowd.
the police had arrived on the spot after few minutes of his reaching there.
he told the police he could identify the person sitting behind sheo shankar singh and that he knew apurva ghosh  pw16  from the date of incident itself.
he had seen sheo shankar singh standing near khalsa hotel on the date of the incident.
at that time there was nobody with him.
the witness denies being a member of maharashta coordination committee  mcc .
he admitted being a member of the committee formed for the construction of a memorial to gurudas chatterjee.
25.
the deposition of subodh chandra kumbhkar  pw8  goes to show that the appellant-umesh singh was seen by the witness on 14th april, 2000 at 11.00 a.m. at amona turn  mod  when he visited the restaurant of the witness for food.
the witness further stated that he had seen appellant-sheo shankar singh on the same day in the morning towards the side of the weigh bridge  kanta .
appellant-sheo shankar singh was at that time with vijay singh chaudhari.
26.
in cross-examination this witness has stated that the license to run the restaurant  described as hotel by the witness  is in the name of his brother nagenddra nath kumbhkar.
he is running the hotel for the past 10-12 years.
the witness does not know where umesh singh used to work and had no acquaintance with him.
the witness denied the suggestion that he used to ask umesh singh about his well being whenever he met him.
umesh singh had on that date taken food in the hotel of the witness and gone away.
there were several others like tapan bharti and mantoo present in the restaurant.
the witness denied the suggestion that he had made a false statement that he had seen sheo shankar singh and umesh singh on the date of the incident.
there is nothing in the deposition of even this witness that could render his version unworthy of credence.
27.
the depositions of all the witnesses referred to above, in our opinion, satisfactorily prove that the appellants were seen hanging around the place of occurrence on 14th april, 2000 and were seen together riding a motorcycle without registration number going towards govindpur at around 1.30 p.m. which is proximate in point of time when the deceased was gunned down.
from the deposition of abdul kudus ansari  pw1  it is further proved that the witness had identified umesh singh as the person who was riding the motorcycle sitting behind appellant-sheo shankar singh not only in the court, but also in the test identification parade held during the course of investigation.
28. coming to the second aspect on which the prosecution has led evidence in support of its case we may point out that while the motorcycle on which the deceased was travelling along with apurba ghosh pw16 was seized from the place of occurrence in terms of seizure memo marked exh.3, the motor cycle used by accused was seized from the premises of kalyans vyapor brisket udyog owned by the appellant- sheo shankar singh.
this seizure was made on 16th april, 2000 at 2.20 p.m. from a reading of the seizure memo it is evident that the motorcycle was a black colour, caliber bajaj make with no registration number on the plate.
from the motorcycle was recovered a certificate of registration and fitness showing the name of jai shankar singh, son of n.p. singh of nirsa, as its owner.
jai shankar singh, it is noteworthy, is none other than the brother of appellant- sheo shankar singh.
29.
apart from the seizure mentioned above, the prosecution has led evidence to prove that the empty cartridges of 9 m.m. bullets with hp-59-ii and triger mark on them were seized from the place of occurrence.
one of the empty cartridges was recovered from near the dead body while the other was recovered from the mud footpath on the southern side of the road.
this is evident from the seizure memo marked exh.1/9.
in addition and more importantly is the seizure of light green t-shirt of the complainant-apurba ghosh  pw-16  with blood stains at the arm and back thereof.
the t-shirt is torn near the left shoulder.
blue coloured jeans worn by the witness was also seized with a tear on the left knee.
the deposition of abdul qudus  pw1  and lal mohan mahto  pw2  support these seizures which corroborate the version of the prosecution that the occurrence had taken place at the spot from where the dead body, the motorcycle, the empty cartridges and the blood stained earth were seized.
the seizure of the t-shirt and the jeans worn by apurba ghosh  pw16  with bloodstains on the t-shirt, scratches damaging the t-shirt near the left shoulder and the jeans on the left knee also corroborates the prosecution version that when hit by the bullet fired by the pillion rider of the motorcycle driven by appellant-sheo shankar singh, the motorcycle on which the deceased was travelling lost its balance bringing both of them down to the ground and causing damage to the clothes worn by apurba ghosh  pw16  and injuries to his person.
the courts below have, in our opinion, correctly appreciated the evidence produced by the prosecution in this regard and rightly concluded that the seizure of the articles mentioned above clearly supports the prosecution version and the sequence of evidence underlying the charge.
30.
the third aspect on which the prosecution has led evidence and which we need to examine before we go to the deposition of the eye witnesses is the medical evidence, supporting the version of apurba ghosh  pw16  that he had sustained injuries when he fell down from the motor cycle after the deceased had been shot by the appellant-umesh singh.
reliance is in this regard placed by the prosecution upon the request made by ramjee prasad  pw17  to the medical officer, primary health centre, govindpur by which apurba ghosh  pw16  was sent for treatment with a request for issue of an injury report.
the requisition is dated 14 th april, 2000 and records three injuries which the witness had sustained apart from the complaint of pain in the chest and the body.
dr. s.c. kunzni of primary health centre, govindpur accordingly examined the injured apurba ghosh  pw16  at 10.25 p.m. on 14th april, 2000 and found the following injuries on his person 1.
complain of chest pain.
2. an abrasion about x injury on the left knee it.
and blackish colour.
3. an abrasion on the lateral malloouo of left leg which is x size.
4. abrasion about in radius on circular in size and blackish crust on the left shoulder.
5. complain of body ache.
31.
the certificate goes on to state that the injuries had been sustained within 8 hours and had been caused by hard and blunt substance.
the making of the requisition, the medical examination of the injured, the presence of injuries on his person have been, in our opinion, satisfactorily proved by the prosecution and go a long way to support the prosecution version that apurba ghosh  pw16  was driving the motorcycle at the time of the incident and had sustained injuries once he lost his balance after the deceased sitting on the pillion was shot by the appellant-umesh singh.
32. time now to examine the eye-witness account of the occurrence.
in his deposition before the trial court apurba ghosh  pw16  stated that according to a previously arranged programme he had borrowed a hero honda motorcycle from one of his friends and reached the house of the deceased gurudas chatterji at 7.00 a.m. after visiting the party office and talking to some persons there the deceased returned to his residence at 9.30 a.m., had his meals and left for dhanbad at about 10.15 a.m. on the way they visited mylasia company and finally started for dhanbad from there at 11.00 a.m. at govindpur block they met lal mohan mahto  pw2  who was told by the deceased to remain at the party office till he returned from dhanbad.
they started from dhanbad at about 12.00 noon and reached kalyan bhawan for the meeting in which the mla met the people assembled there.
in the meantime the witness went to the mining office which was closed and handed over a sum of rs.9850/- to the peon for making a deposit of the same towards royalty.
the witness then returned to the place where the meeting was convened and started back for nirsa at around 1.30 p.m. on the motorcycle with the deceased sitting on the pillion seat.
at about 2.45 p.m. they crossed premier hard coke, situated at g.t. road, when the witness heard the sound of firing from behind.
on this he turned back only to see that one 100 cc black coloured caliber motorcycle which was being driven by the appellant-sheo shankar singh with an unknown person sitting on the pillion carrying a pistol in his right hand, was on his left.
the person fired a second shot which hit the deceased who slumped on the back of the witness with the result that the balance of the motorcycle got disturbed bringing the witness and the deceased down to the ground.
the appellant-sheo shankar singh stopped the motorcycle being driven by him at some distance whereupon the man sitting at the back ran towards the deceased verbally abusing the witness and asking him to run away.
on seeing this, the witness started running towards the west.
the unknown person went near the mla and fired another shot and pushed the dead body towards the slope on the side of the road.
the unknown person then ran back to the motorcycle driven by sheo shanker singh who was waiting for him with the engine of the motorcycle running.
33.
the witness further stated that a crowd assembled n