--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

petitioner guramma bhratar chanbasappa deshmukh and another vs. respondent malappa date of judgment 19/08/1963 bench subbarao, k. bench subbarao, k. dayal, raghubar mudholkar, j.r. citation 1964 air 510 1964 scr  4  497 citator info r 1966 sc 984  8,9  rf 1967 sc 569  9  act hindu law-joint family-manager, powers of-gifts of property to stranger and to daughter after marriage, validity of- adoption-whether existence of son in embryo invalidates adoption-partition-sudras of bombay presidency-share of adopted son vis-a-vis natural born son.
headnote a died on january 8, 1944.
he left behind him three wives and two widowed daughters, children of his predeceased wife.
the senior most widow filed a civil suit for partition and possession of 1/6th share after setting aside the alienations made by her husband on january 4 and 5, 1944.
it was alleged that at the time of the death of a his youngest wife was pregnant and that she gave birth to a male child on october 4, 1944.
on january 30, 1944, the senior most widow took her sisters son in adoption.
a few days before his death a executed two deeds of maintenance in favour of his two wives  defendant numbers 1 and 2  and also executed deeds of gift in favour of widowed daughter, a son of an illegitimate son and a relative.
long before his death he also executed two deeds viz one a deed of maintenance and a deed of gift in favour of the senior most widow  the plaintiff .
to this suit the two widows were made defendants 1 and 2 the alleged adopted son, defendant 3,  1  a.i.r.
1960 mad.
443.  
2  l. r. 63 i. a. 372.  
3  1955 2 s.c.r.
1140.
498 the alleged posthumous son, defendant 4 and the alienees defendants 5 to 8.
these two appeals arise out of the certificate granted by the high court.
held  1  that the existence of a son in embryo does not in- validate an adoption.
narayana reddi v. varadachala reddi, s. a. number 223 of 1859 m.s.d.
1859, p. 97, referred to.
nagabhushanam v. seshammagaru,  1878-81  i.l.r.
3 mad.
180 shamvahoo v. dwarakadas vasanji,  1888  i.l.r.
12 born.
202, daulat ram v. ram lal,  1907  i.l.r.
29 all 310, approved.  
2 that the high court was right in affirming the alienations made in favour of the plaintiff and was equally justified in setting side the alienations made in favour of defendants 1 and 2. the former documents were executed by a in 1937 and 1939 when he was the sole surviving coparcenar whereas the latter documents were executed when he had ceased to have that power because the malechild i.e., 4th defendant was already conceived.  
3 that a managing member of the family has power to, alienatefor value joint family property either for family necessity or for the benefit of the estate.
the sole surviving member of a coparcenary has an absolute power to alienate the family property, as at the time of alienation there is no other member who has joint interest in the family.
if another member was conceived in the family or inducted therein by adoption the power of the manager was circumscribed as aforesaid and if the alienations were made by the manager or father for a purpose not binding on the estate, they would be voidable at the instance of subsequently born son or adopted son.
avdesh kumar v. zakaul hassain, i.l.r.
1944 all 612, chan- dramani v. jambeswara, a.i.r. 1931 mad.
550 and bhagwat prasad bahidar v. debichand bogra,  1941  i.l.r.
20 pat.727, referred to.  4  that a gift to a stranger of joint family property by the manager of the family is void as he has not the absolute power of disposal over the joint hindu family property.
partha sarathi pillai v. tiruvengada,  1907  i.l.r.
30 mad.
340, referred to.  5  that the hindu law texts conferred a right upon a daughter or a sister, as the case may be, to have a share in the family property at the time of partition.
the right was lost by efflux of time.
but it became crystallized into a moral obligation.
the father or his representative can make a valid gift by way of reasonable provision for the maintenance of the daughter, regard being had to the financial and other relevant circumstances of the family.
by custom or by convenience, such gifts arc made at the time of marriage, but the right of the father or his representative to make such a gift is not confined to the marriage occasion.
it is a moral obligation and it continues to subsist till it is discharged marriage is only a customary occasion for such a gift.
but the 499 moral obligation can be discharged at any time, either during the life time of the father or thereafter.
applying the aforesaid principles, the deed of gift made by father to the daughter, i.e. 8th defendant in the present case, was within his right and certainly reasonable.
jinnappa mahadevappa v. chimmava,  1935  i.l r. 59 bom.
459, disapproved.
vettorammal v. poochammal,  1912  22 m.l.j.
321, kudutamma v. narasimhacharyalu,  1907  17 m.l.j.
528, sundaramaya v. seethamma,  1911  21 m.l.j.
695, ramaswamy aiyyar v. vengidsami iyer,  1898  i.l.r.
22 mad.
11

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

3, bachoo v. mankorebai   1907  i.l.r. 31 bom.
373, ramalinga annavi v. narayana annavi,  1922  49 i.a. 168, sithamahalakshmamma v. kotayya,  1936  71 m.l.j.
259, annamalai v. sundarathammal,  1952  2 m.l.j. 782 and churaman sahu v. gopi sahu,  1910  i.l.r.
37 cal.
1 approved.   5  that the hindu law applicable to sudras applies to lingayats as well.   6  that in bombay presidency the rule accepted in dattaka chandrika has never been followed and the share of an adopted son in competition with a natural born son among sudras has always been 1/5th in the family property, i.e. 1/4th of the natural born sons share.
the rule in dattaka chandrika is that among sudras an adopted son and an after born natural son take equal share in the family property and it is followed in madras and bengal provinces.
tirkangauda mallangauda v. shivappa patil, i.l.r. 1943 bom- 706, gopal narhar safray v. hanumant ganesh safray,  1879  i.l.r. 3 bom.
273, gopalan v. venkataraghavulu,  1915  i.l.r.
40 mad.
632 and asita v. nirode,  1916  20 c.w.n.
901 , referred to.
arumilli perrazu v. arumilli subbarayadu,  1921  48 i.a. 280, distinguished.
giriapa v. ningapa,  1892  i.l.r. 17 bom.
100 and tukaram mahadu v. ramachandra mahadu,  1925  i.l.r.
49 bom.
672, approved.
judgment civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeals numbers 334 and 335 of 1960.
appeals from the judgment and decree dated 16/17th august 1955 of the bombay high court in first appeal number 341 of 1950.
a. f. viswanatha sastri, m. rajagopalan and k. r. chaudhri for appellants numbers 1 and 3  in c.a. number 334/60  and respondents numbers 1 and 3  in c.a.
no, 335/60 .
r. gopalkrishnan, for appellants numbers 4, 5 and 13  in c.a. number 334/1960  and respondents numbers 4, 5 and 13  in c.a. numbers 335/60 .
naunit lal, for appellants numbers 6, 9 to 11 and 12  in c.a. number 334/60  and respondents numbers 6, 9 to 11 and 12  in c.a. number 335/60 .
n.c. chatterjee, s. venkatakrishnan and a. g. ratnaparkhi, for the respondents  in c.a. number 334/60  and the appellants  in c. a. number 335/60 .
august 19, 1963.
the judgment of the court was delivered by subba rao j.-these two appeals by certificate arise out of special civil suit number 47 of 1946 filed by nagamma, wife of chanbasappa, for partition and possession of one-sixth share in the plaint scheduled properties with mesne profits.
chanbasappa died possessed of a large extent of immovable property on january 8, 1944.
he left behind him three wives, nagamma, guramma and venkamma and two widowed daughters, sivalingamma and neelamma, children of his pre- deceased wife.
it is alleged that at the time of his death venkamma was pregnant and that she gave birth to a mate child on october 4, 1944.
it is also alleged that on january 30, 1944, nagamma, the senior most widow, took her sisters son, malappa, in adoption.
a few days before his death, chanbasappa executed gift and maintenance deeds in favour of his wives, widowed daughter, a son of an illegitimate son, and a relative.
long before his death, he also executed two deeds-one a deed of maintenance and another a gift deed of some property in favour of nagamma.
we shall deal with these alienations in detail in appropriate places.
the plaintiff, one of the three surviving widows of chanbasappa, filed the aforesaid suit for recovery of her share after setting aside the alienations made by her hus- band on.
january 4 and 5, 1944.
to that suit, guramma and venkamma, the other two widows of chanbasappa, were made defendants 1 and 2 the alleged adopted son, defendant 3 the alleged posthumous son, defendant 4 and the alienees, defendants 5 to 8. defendant 3 naturally supported the plaintiff, and the other defendants contested the suit.
the.
contesting defendants denied the factum and validity of the adoption of defendants by the plaintiffs and they asserted that defendant 4 was the posthumous son of chanbasappa by ven- kamma, the second defendant.
the alienees sought to sustam.
the validity of the alienations in their favour.
as many as, 12 issues were, framed in them case, the learned civil judge found that defendant 3 was taken in adaption by the plaintiff on january 30, 1944, but,it was invalid in law that.
defendant 4 was born to defendant 2 by the deceased that the plaintiff had. failed to prove that the deeds executed by-chanbasappa.
on january 4, 1944, in favour of defendants 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 were vitiated by fraud and that the plaintiff was entitled to one-sixth share in the suit.
property and for partition and recovery of the same.
in the result he passed a decree for partition and delivery of the plaintiffs one-sixth share in the property.
he also held that defendants 1 and 2 would each be entitled to one- sixth share and that defendant 4 would be entitled to three-sixths share therein.
he declared that the deeds executed by the deceased in favour of the plaintiff as well as in favour of the defendants were binding on the parties to the suit.
he directed an enquiry as to the future mesne profits from the date of the suit.
the plaintiff and defendant 3 preferred an appeal to the high court, being first appeal number341 of the 1950 against the decree of the civil judge insofar as it went against them.
the high court agreed with the learned civil judge that defendant 4 was the posthumous son of the deceased by the second defendant it accepted the finding of the learned civil judge that the adoption took place but it also held that it was valid in law.
it declared that the deeds executed by the deceased on january 4 and 5, 1944 in favour of defendants 6, 7 and 8 were invalid as also the gift over in favour of defendant 5.
it held that, as defendants 1 and 2 were getting a share in the property, they were not entitled to separate maintenance given to them under the deed executed by their husband and directed that property also should be brought into the hotchpot and divided between the parties.
it declared that the plaintiff and defendants 1 and 2 were each entitled to 4/27 share in the suit property, that defendant 3 was entitled to 1/9 share therein, and defendant 4 was entitled to 4/9 share therein.
it also gave further directions in the matter of partition, costs and mesne profits.
plaintiff and defendant 3 preferred civil appeal number 335 of 1960, and defendants 1, 2, 4 and 5, the legal repre- sentatives of defendant 7 and defendant 8 preferred civil appeal number 334 of 1960 to this court against the decree of the high court insofar as it went against them.
at the outset it would be convenient to clear the ground and focus our attention on the outstanding points of difference between the parties.
the factum of adoption of defendant 3 by the plaintiff is accepted, but its legality is questioned.
the fact that the 4th defendant is the posthumous son of chanbasappa by the 2nd defendant is also not disputed.
in the result the following questions only remain to be answered in the present appeals  1  whether the adoption of defendant 3 by the plaintiff was void as it was made at a time when defendant 4 had already been conceived.   2  whether the alienations in favour of defen- dants 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 are binding on the members of the family.
and  3  what is the share of an adopted soil of a sudra in competition with the natural born son?
mr. viswanatha sastri, appearing for defendants 1 and 4  appellants 1 and 3 in civil appeal number 334 of 1960  contends that the adoption of defendant 3 was void inasmuch as at the time of the adoption defendant 4 had been conceived.
he presses on us to extend the legal position, by analogy, of the right of a son in the womb at the time his father made an alienation of a family property to set aside that alienation, to that of an adopted son in similar circumstances.
the hindu law texts do not throw much light on the subject.
dattaka chandrika and dattaka mimamsa are the treatises specially composed on the subject of adoption.
nanda pandita cites the following texts of atri and cankha in dattaka mimasa by a man destitute of son only must a substitute for the same be adopted.   atri .
one to whom no son has been born, or whose son has died having fasted, etc  cankha .
in section 13, nanda pandita explains that the term desti- tute of a son must be understood to include a sons sort and grandson.
in dattaka chandrika the relevant part of the text of cankha is stated thus one destitute of a son-see s. i, 4. one having no male issue-see s. ii.
1.
these texts ex facie do not equate a son in existence with a son in the womb.
if the authors of the said treatises intended to equate the one with the other, they would not have left it in doubt, for such an extension of the doctrine would introduce an element of uncertainty in the matter of adoption and defeat, in some cases, the religious object underlying adoption.
it is now well settled that the main object of adoption is to secure spiritual benefit to the adopter, though its secondary object is to secure an heir to perpetuate the adopters name.
such being the significance of adoption, its validity shall not be made to depend upon the contingencies that may or may not happen.
it is suggested that an adoption cannot be made unless there is certainty of not getting a son and that if the wife is pregnant, there is a likelihood of the adopter begetting a son and, therefore, the adoption made is void.
the texts cited do not support the said proposition.
its acceptance will lead to anomalies.
suppose a husband who is seriously ill and who had no knowledge of the pregnancy of his wife, makes an adoption in such an event, the existence of a pregnancy, of which he has no knowledge, invalidates the adoption, whether the pregnancy turns out to be fruitful or not.
if he has knowledge of the pregnancy, he will not be in a position to take a boy in adoption, though ultimately the wife may have an abortion, or deliver a stillborn child or the child born may turn out to be a girl.
further, as it is well settled law that a son includes a sons son and a grandson of the son, the pregnancy of a sons widow or a grandsons widow, on the parity of the said reasoning, will invalidate an adoption.
we cannot introduce such a degree of uncertainty in the law of adoption unless hindu law texts or authoritative decisions compel us to do so.
there are no texts of hindu law imposing a condition of non-pregnancy of the wife or sons widow or a grandsons widow for the exercise of a persons power to adopt.
the decisions of the high courts on the subject discountenance the acceptance of any such condition.
but there is a decision of sudr adalut in narayana reddi v. vardachala reddi 1 , wherein it was observed that it was of the essence of the power to adopt that the party adopting should be hopeless of having issue.
mr. mayne s.a. number 223 of 1859, m.s.d. 1859, p. 97.
commenting upon the said observation drew a distinction between a husband taking a boy in adoption knowing that his wife was pregnant and doing so without the said knowledge and stated if a wife, known to be pregnant at the time of adoption, afterwards brought forth a son it might fairly be held he was then in existence to the extent of precluding an adoption .
a division bench of the madras high court in nagabhushanam v. seshammagaru 1  criticized the opinion of the pandits as well as the observation of w. mayne, and came to the conclusion that an adoption by a hindu with knowledge of his wifes pregnancy was not invalid.
the bombay high court in shamavahoo v. dwarkadas vasanji  2  accepted the said view.
a division bench of the allahabad high court in daulat ram v. ram lal 3  followed the madras and bombay decisions.
no other decision has been brought to our notice either taking a different view or throwing a doubt thereon.
all textbooks-mayne, mulla, sarkar sastri-accepted the correctness of the said view without any comment.
mr. viswanatha sastri contends that under the hindu law a son conceived or in his mothers womb is equal in many respects to a son actually in existence in the matter of inheritance, partition, survivorship and the right to im- peach an alienation made by his father and that, therefore, logically the same equation must hold good in the case of adoption.
when a son in his mothers womb is equated with a son in existence vis-a-vis his right to set aside an alienation or to reopen a partition, the argument proceeds, the father cannot validly adopt, as from the date of con- ception the son must be deemed to be in existence.
but there is an essential distinction between an alienation, partition and inheritance on the one hand and adoption on the other his right to set aside an alienation hinges on his secular right to secure his share in the property belonging to the family, as he has a right by birth in the joint family property and transactions effected by the father in excess of his power when he was in embryo are voidable at  1   1978-81  i.l.r.
3 mad.
180.   2   1888  i.l.r. 12 bom.
202.  3   1907  i.l.r. 29 au.
310.
his instance but, in the case of adoption, it secures mainly spiritual benefit to the father and the power to adopt is conferred on him to achieve that object.
the doctrine evolved wholly for a secular purpose would be inappropriate to a case of adoption.
we should be very reluctant to extend it to adoption, as it would lead to many anomalies and in some events defeat the object of the conferment , of the power itself.
the scope of the power must be reasonably construed so as to enable the donee of the power to discharge his religious duty.
we, therefore, hold that the existence of a son in embryo does not invalidate an adoption.
the next contention of mr. viswanatha sastri is that the high court, having set aside the alienations made by chanbasappa, should have brought into hotchpot the property covered by the said alienations for the purpose of partition.
the particulars of the alienations may be notic- ed at this stage.
---------------------------------------------------------- exhibit nature of properties s. number number date in favour of document comprised of ---------------------------------------------------------- 1. 3624-1-44 d-1 guramma deed of pit.
sch.
a. mainten- ance 2. 3725-1-44 d-2 venkamma deed of pit.
sch.
a. mainten- ance giftover to d-5 3. 3694-1-44 d-6 imam sahib deed of pit.
sch. a. gift.
4. 3704-1-44 d-7 channappa deed of plt.sch.a-3.
5. 3714-1-44 d-8 neelamma deed of plt.sch.a-3.
maint- enance 346 30-1-37 plff.
nagamma deed of maint- enance 347 14-2-39 plff.
nagamma deed of gift.
----------------------------------------------------------- 33-2 s. c. india/64 this argument is based upon a misapprehension.- the high court, having set aside the alienations, including those in favour of defendants 1 and 2 directed the said property to be divided in accordance with the shares declared by it.
this position is also conceded on behalf of the plaintiff and defendant 3.
we need not, therefore, pursue this matter.
mr. k. r. chaudhri, following mr. viswanatha sastri, further contends that the high court went wrong in making a distinction between the documents executed in favour of the plaintiff in that while it confirmed the documents exs.
346 and 347 executed in favour of the plaintiff, it set aside the deeds executed in favour of defendants 1 and 2.
there are no merits in this contention.
the documents executed in favour of the plaintiff are exs.
346 dated january 30, 1937 and 347 dated february 14, 1939.
these two documents were executed by chanbasappa at a time when he was the sole surviving coparcener, whereas he executed the documents in favour of defendants 1 and 2 -after the 4th defendant was conceived.
the former were -executed when he had absolute power of disposal, whereas the latter were executed when he had ceased to have the said power.
on the basis of this distinction the high court rightly set aside the alienations made in favour of defendants 1 and 2. mr. naunit lal, appearing for some of the legal re- presentatives of defendant 7 who are appellants 6, 9 to 11 and 12 in civil appeal number 334 of 1960 and respondents 6, 9 to 11 and 12 in civil appeal number 335 of 1960, contends that the gift deeds executed by, chanbasappa in favour of defendants 7 and 8 were binding on the members or the family.
the high court held that chanbasappa could not have validly made these gifts of immovable property of the joint family after the 4th defendant was conceived and, therefore, they were void.
mr. naunit lal broadly contends that the alienations effected by chanbasappa were voidable only at the instance of the 4th defendant, who was in the womb on the date of the alienations and that as he has chosen to adopt them, the third defendant, who was adopted subsequent to the alienations, could not question their validity.
before we advert to the legal aspects of the argument, it may be stated at once that no question of consent of the 4th defendant can possibly arise in this case, as he was not born when the alienations were made and he was a minor at the time the suit was filed.
we must, therefore, proceed on the basis that the alienations were made by one of the members of the joint family without the consent of the other members of the family.
if so, at the time the alienations were made chanbasappa had not the absolute power to alienate the family property, but only a limited one to do so for the purpose of necessity or benefit of the estate.
the relevant principles are well settled.
a coparcener, whether he is natural born or adopted into the family, acquires an interest by birth or adoption, as the case may be, in the ancestral property of the family.
a managing -member of the family has power to alienate for value joint family property either for family necessity or for the benefit of the estate.
an alienation can also be made by a managing member with the consent of all the coparceners of the family.
the sole surviving member of a coparcenary has an absolute power to alienate the family property, as at the time of alienation there is no other member who has joint interest in the family.
if another member was in existence or in the womb of his mother at the time of the alienation, the power of the manager was circum- scribed as aforesaid and his alienation would be voidable at the instance of the existing member or the member who was in the womb but was subsequently born, as the case may be, unless it was made for purposes binding on the member of the family or the existing member consented to it or the subsequently born member ratified it after he attained majority.
if another member was conceived in the family or inducted therein by adoption before such consent or ratification, his right to avoid the alienation will not be affected see avdesh kumar v. zakaul hassain 1  chandramani v. jambeswara 2  and bhagwat prasad bahidar v. debichand bogra 3 .
in the instant case the impugned alienations were made at a time when the 4th defendant was in the womb i.e., at a time when chanabasappa had only a limited right of disposal over the joint  1  i.l.r.
1944 all-612.  2  a.i.r. 1931 mad.
550.   3   1941  i.l.r.
20 pat.
727.
family property.
the 4th defendant being in the womb, he could not obviously give his consent, nor ratify the alienations before the adoption of the 3rd defendant took place and he was inducted into the family.
if the aliena- tions were made by the father for a purpose not binding on the estate, they would be voidable at the instance of the 3rd or 4th defendant.
the next question is whether the two gifts were binding on the family.
we shall now take the two gift deeds exs.
370 and 371 executed by chanbasappa-the former in favour of the 7th defendant and the latter in favour of the 8th defendant.
the high court, agreeing with the learned civil judge, set aside the gifts on the ground that the donor had no power to make a gift of the family property.
learned counsel for the legal representatives of the said defendants seeks to sustain the validity of the said two gifts.
we shall consider the validity of the two gift deeds separately.
ex. 370 dated january 4, 1944, is a gift deed executed by chanbasappa in favour of channappa, the 7th defendant, in respect of immovable property valued at rs. 1,500/-.
the donee was described as the donors relative.
the gift was made in token of love for the services rendered by the donee to the donor during the latters lifetime.
the gift was made, as it was narrated in the document, out of love and affection for the donee.
it is contended that the said gift was for pious purposes and, therefore, valid in law.
can it be said that a gift of this nature to a relative out of love and affection is a gift for pious purposes within the meaning of that expression in hindu law?
in mitakshara, ch.
i, s. 1, v. 28, it is stated even a single individual may conclude a donation, mortgage, or sale of immovable property, during a season of distress, for the sake of the family and especially for pious purposes.
in support of his contention that pious purposes include a charitable purpose, learned counsel relies upon certain passages in mukherjeas hindu law of religious and charitable trust, 2nd edn.
the learned author says at p. 12 in the hindu system there is no line of demarcation between religion and charity.
on the other hand charity is regarded as part of religion  all the hindu sages concur in holding that charitable gifts are pious acts par excellence, which bring appropriate rewards to the donor the learned author proceeds to state, at p. 58 religious and charitable purposes have nowhere been defined by hindu lawyers.
it was said by sir subrahmanya ayyar j. in partha sarathi pillai v. tiruvengada 1  that the expression dharma when applied to gifts means and includes according to hindu text writers, what are.
known as istha and purtta works.
as i have said already in the first lecture, no exhaustive list of such works has been drawn up by the hindu lawgivers, and they include all acts of piety and benevolence whether sanctioned by vedas or by the popular religion, the nature of the acts differing at different periods of hindu religious history.
the learned author defines the words istha and purtta briefly thus, at p. 10 by istha is meant vedic sacrifices, and rites and gifts in connection with the same purtta on the other hand means and signifies other pious and charitable acts which are unconnected with any srouta or vedic sacrifice.
it may, therefore, be conceded that the expression pious purposes is wide enough, under certain circumstances, to take in charitable purposes though the scope of the latter purposes has nowhere been precisely drawn.
but what we are concerned with in this case is the power of a manager to make a gift to an outsider of a joint family property.
the scope of the limitations on that power has been fairly well settled by the decisions interpreting the relevant texts of hindu law.
the decisions of hindu law sanctioned gifts to strangers by a manager of a joint hindu family of a small extent of property for pious purposes.
but no authority went so far, and none has been placed before us, to sustain such a gift to a stranger however much the donor was beholden to him on the ground that it was made out of charity.
it must be remembered that the manager has no absolute power of disposal over joint hindu family  1   1907  i.l.r.
30 mad.
340. property.
the hindu law permits him to do so only within strict limits.
we cannot extend the scope of the power on the basis of the wide interpretation given to the words pious purposes in hindu law in a different context.
in the circumstances, we hold that a gift to a stranger of a joint family property by the manager of the family is void.
the second document is ex. 371, dated july 4, 1944.
under that document, chanbasappa created a life-interest in a property of the value of about rs. 5,000/- in favour of his widowed daughter, the 8th defendant.
in the document it is recited thus you are my own daughter and your husband is dead.
after his death you have been living in my house only.
for your well being and maintenance during your life time i have already given some property -to you.
as the income from the said property is not suffi- cient for your maintenance, you have asked me to give some more property for your maintenance.
i have therefore gladly agreed  to the same  and passed a deed of maintenance in your favour regarding the below mentioned property and delivered it to your possession to-day only.
under the said deed the daughter should enjoy the property during her lifetime and thereafter it should go to the 5th defendant.
the gift-over would inevitably be invalid.
but the question is whether the provision for the daughters maintenance during her lifetime would also be invalid.
the correctness of the recitals are not questioned before us.
it is in evidence that the family possesses a large extent of property, worth lakhs.
the short question is whether the father could have validly conferred a lifeinterest in a small bit of property on his widowed daughter in indigent circumstances for her maintenance.
it is said that the hindu law does not permit such a gift.
in jinnappa mahadevappa v. chimmava 1 , the bombay high court accepted that legal position.
rangnekar j. held that under the mitakshara school of hindu law, a father has no right to make a gift even of a small portion of joint family immovable property in favour of his daughter, although it is made on the ground that she looked after him in his  1   1935  i.l.r.
59 bom.
459, 465.
old age.
the learned judge distinguished all the cases cited before him on the ground that they were based upon long standing customs and ended his judgment with the following observations undoubtedly, the gift is a small portion of the whole of the property but, if one were to ignore the elementary principles of hindu law out of ones sympathy with gifts of this nature, it would be difficult to say where the line could be drawn, and it might give rise to difficulties which no attempt could overcome.
we agree with the learned judge that sympathy is out of place in laying down the law.
if the hindu law texts clearly and expressly prohibit the making of such a gift of the family property by the father to the widowed daughter in indigent circumstances,, it is no doubt the duty of the court to accept the law, leaving it to the legislature to change the law.
we shall therefore, consider the relevant hindu law texts bearing on the subject.
at the outset it would be convenient to clear the ground.
verses 27, 28 and 29 in ch.
i, mitakshara, describe the limitations placed on a father in making gifts of ancestral estate.
they do not expressly deal with the right of a father to make provision for his daughter by giving her some family property at the time of her marriage or subsequently.
that right is defined separately by hindu law texts and evolved by a long catena of decisions, based on the said texts.
the relevant texts have been collected and extracted in vettorammal v. poochammal 1 .
section 7 of the ch.
i, mitakshara, deals with provision for widows, unmarried daughters etc. placitum 10 and 11 provide for portions to sisters when a partition is made between the brothers after the death of the father.
the allotment of a share to daughters in the family is regarded as obligatory by vignaneswara.
in ch.
i, s. 7 pp.
10 and 11, he says the allotment of such a share appears to be indispensably requisite, since the refusal of it is pronounced to be a sin.
he relies on the text of manu to the effect that they who refuse to give it shall be degraded manu ch.
i,s. 118.
in placitum 11, ch. 1, withholding of such a portion is  1   1912  22 m.l.j.
321. pronounced to be a sin.
in madhaviya, pp. 41 and 42, a text of katyayana is cited authorizing the gift of immovable property by a father to his daughters beside a gift of movables upto the amount of 2,000 phanams a year.
in vyavahara mayukha, p. 93, the following text of brihaspati is also cited by the author of the madhaviya to the same effect let him give adequate wealth and a share of land also if he desires.
devala says to maidens should be given a nuptial portion of the fathers estate-colebrookes digest, vol. 1, p. 185.
manu says to the unmarried daughters by the same mother let their brothers give portions out of their allotments respectively, according to the class of their several mothers.
let each give one-fourth part of his own distinct share and those who refuse to give it shall be degraded.
these and similar other texts indicate that hindu law texts not only sanction the giving of property to daughters at the time of partition or at the time of their marriage, as the case may be, but also condemn the dereliction of the said duty in unequivocal terms.
it is true that these hindu law texts have become obsolete.
the daughter has lost her right to a share in the family property at the time of its partition.
but though the right has been lost, it has been crystallized into a moral obligation on the part of the father to provide for the daughter either by way of marriage provision or subsequently.
courts even recognized making of such a provision not only by the father but also after his death by the accredited representative of the family and even by the widow.
the decision in kudutamma v. nara- simhacharyalu 1  is rather instructive.
there, it was held that a hindu father was entitled to make gifts by way of marriage portions to his daughters out of the family pro- perty to a reasonable extent.
the first defendant was the half-brother of the plaintiffs and the father of the 2nd defendant.
after the death of his father and after the birth of the 2nd defendant he for himself and as guardian of the 2nd defendant executed a deed of gift, to the plaintiffs jointly, of certain portions of the joint  1   1907  17 m.l.j.
528.
family property.
the question was whether that gift was good.
it will be seen from the facts that the gift was made by the brother to his half-sisters not at the time of their marriage but subsequently.
even so, the gift was upheld.
wallis j. in his judgment pointed out that unmarried daughters were formerly entitled to share on partition and that after-marriage they were entitled to an endowment and that though that right fell into desuetude, a gift made to a daughter-was sustained by courts as a provision for the married couple.
the learned judge summarized the position thus, at p. 532 .
although the joint family and its representative, the father or other managing member, may no longer be legally bound to provide an endowment for the bride on the occasion of her marriage, they are still morally bound to do so, at any rate when the circumstances of the case make it reasonably necessary.
if such a provision was not made at the time of marriage, the learned judge indicated that such moral obligation could be discharged subsequently by a representative of the family.
to quote his observations-mere neglect on the part of the joint family to fulfill a moral obligation at the time of the marriage, cannot, in my opinion, be regarded as putting an end to it, and i think it continued until it was discharged by the deed of gift now sued on and executed after the fathers death by his son, the 1st defendant who succeeded him as managing member of the joint family.
another division bench of the madras high court considered the question in sundararamaya v. seethamma 1  and declared the validity of a gift of 8 acres of ancestral land by a hindu father to his daughter after marriage when the family was possessed of 200 acres of land.
the marriage took place about forty years before the gift.
there was no evidence that the father then had any intention to give any property to the daughter.
the legal position was thus expounded by the learned judges, munro and sankaran nair jj.
the father or the widow is not bound to give any property.
there may be no legal but only a moral obligation.
it is also true that in the case before us ---the father did not make any gift and discharge that  1   1911  21 m.l.j.
695, 699.
moral obligation at the time of the marriage.
but it is difficult to see why the moral obligation does not sustain a gift because it was not made to the daughter at the time of marriage, but only some time later.
the moral obligation of the plaintiffs father continued in force till it was discharged by the gift in 1899.
another division bench of the madras high court in ramaswamy ayyer v. vengidusami ayyer 1  held that a gift of land made by a widow, on the occasion of her daughters marriage, to the bridegroom was valid.
sundara aiyer and spencer jj.
held in vetto