--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil original jurisdiction writ petition  civil number135 of 2012 1 republic of italy ors.
petitioners vs. 2 union of india ors.
respondents with special leave petition  civil  number20370 of 2012 1 2 massimilano latorre ors.
petitioners vs. 3 union of india ors.
respondents j u d g m e n t altamas kabir, cji.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

1. the past decade has witnessed a sharp increase in acts of piracy on the high seas off the coast of somalia and even in the vicinity of the minicoy islands forming part of the lakshadweep archipelago.
in an effort to counter piracy and to ensure freedom of navigation of merchant shipping and for the protection of vessels flying the italian flag in transit in international seas, the republic of italy enacted government decree 107 of 2011, converted into law of parliament of italy number130 of 2nd august, 2011, to protect italian ships from piracy in international seas.
article 5 of the said legislation provides for deployment of italian military navy contingents on italian vessels flying the italian flag, to counter the growing menace of piracy on the seas.
pursuant to the said law of parliament of italy number130 of 2nd august, 2011, a protocol of agreement was purportedly entered into on 11th october, 2011, between the ministry of defence naval staff and italian shipowners confederation  confitarma , pursuant to which the petitioner numbers2 and 3 in the writ petition, who are also the petitioner numbers1 and 2 in the special leave petition, were deployed along with four others, as team latorre, on board the m.v. enrica lexie on 6th february, 2012, to protect the said vessel and to embark thereon on 11th february, 2011, from galle in sri lanka.
the said military deployment order was sent by the italian navy general staff to the concerned military attaches in new delhi, india and muscat, oman.
a change in the disembarkation plans, whereby the planned port of disembarkation was shifted from muscat to djibouti, was also intimated to the concerned attaches.
2. while the aforesaid vessel, with the military protection detachment on board, was heading for djibouti on 15th february, 2012, it came across an indian fishing vessel, st. antony, which it allegedly mistook to be a pirate vessel, at a distance of about 20.5 nautical miles from the indian sea coast off the state of kerala, and on account of firing from the italian vessel, two persons in the indian fishing vessel were killed.
after the said incident, the italian vessel continued on its scheduled course to djibouti.
when the vessel had proceeded about 38 nautical miles on the high seas towards djibouti, it received a telephone message, as well as an e- mail, from the maritime rescue co-ordination centre, mumbai, asking it to return to cochin port to assist with the enquiry into the incident.
responding to the message, the m.v. enrica lexie altered its course and came to cochin port on 16th february, 2012.
upon docking in cochin, the master of the vessel was informed that first information report  f.i.r.   number2 of 2012 had been lodged with the circle inspector, neendakara, kollam, kerala, under section 302 read with section 34 of the indian penal code  i.p.c.  in respect of the firing incident leading to the death of the two indian fishermen.
on 19th february, 2012, massimilano latorre and salvatore girone, the petitioner numbers2 and 3 in writ petition number135 of 2012, were arrested by the circle inspector of police, coastal police station, neendakara, kollam, from willington island and have been in judicial custody ever since.
3. on 20th february, 2012, the petitioner numbers2 and 3 were produced before the chief judicial magistrate  c.j.m. , kollam, by the circle inspector of police, coastal police station, neendakara, who prayed for remand of the accused to judicial custody.
4. the petitioners thereupon filed writ petition number4542 of 2012 before the kerala high court, under article 226 of the constitution, challenging the jurisdiction of the state of kerala and the circle inspector of police, kollam district, kerala, to register the f.i.r.
and to conduct investigation on the basis thereof or to arrest the petitioner numbers2 and 3 and to produce them before the magistrate.
the writ petitioners prayed for quashing of f.i.r.
number2 of 2012 on the file of the circle inspector of police, neendakara, kollam district, as the same was purportedly without jurisdiction, contrary to law and null and void.
the writ petitioners also prayed for a declaration that their arrest and detention and all proceedings taken against them were without jurisdiction, contrary to law and, therefore, void.
a further prayer was made for the release of the petitioner numbers2 and 3 from the case.
5. between 22nd and 26th february, 2012, several relatives of the deceased sought impleadment in the writ petition and were impleaded as additional respondents numbers4, 5 and 6. 6.
during the pendency of the writ petition, the presenting officer within the tribunal of rome, republic of italy, intimated the ministry of defence of italy on 24th february, 2012, that criminal proceedings number9463 of 2012 had been initiated against the petitioner numbers2 and 3 in italy.
it was indicated that punishment for the crime of murder under section 575 of the italian penal code is imprisonment of at least 21 years.
7. after entering appearance in the writ petition, the union of india and its investigating agency filed joint statements therein on 28th february, 2012, on behalf of the union of india and the coast guard, with the kerala high court, along with the boarding officers report dated 16th- 17th february, 2012, as an annexure.
on 5th march, 2012, the consul general filed a further affidavit on behalf of the republic of italy, annexing additional documents in support of its claim that the accused had acted in an official capacity.
in the affidavit, the consul general reasserted that italy had exclusive jurisdiction over the writ petitioners and invoked sovereign and functional immunity.
8. the kerala high court heard the matter and directed the petitioners to file their additional written submissions, which were duly filed on 2nd april, 2012, whereupon the high court reserved its judgment.
however, in the meantime, since the judgment in the writ petition was not forthcoming, the petitioners filed the present writ petition under article 32 of the constitution of india on 19th april, 2012, inter alia, for the following reliefs-  i  declare that any action by all the respondents in relation to the alleged incident referred to in para 6 and 7 above, under the criminal procedure code or any other indian law, would be illegal and ultra vires and violative of articles 14 and 21 of the constitution of india and  ii  declare that the continued detention of petitioners 2 and 3 by the state of kerala is illegal and ultra vires being violative of the principles of sovereign immunity and also violative of art.
14 and 21 of the constitution of india and  iii  issue writ of mandamus and or any other suitable writ, order or direction under article 32 directing that the union of india take all steps as may be necessary to secure custody of petitioners 2 and 3 and make over their custody to petitioner number1.
9. during the pendency of the said writ petition in this court, the kerala state police filed charge sheet against the petitioner numbers2 and 3 herein on 18th may, 2012 under sections 302, 307, 427 read with section 34 indian penal code and section 3 of the suppression of unlawful acts against safety of maritime navigation and fixed platforms on continental shelf act, 2002, hereinafter referred to as the sua act.
on 29th may, 2012, the learned single judge of the kerala high court dismissed writ petition  civil  number4542 of 2012 on two grounds.
the learned single judge held that under the notification number so 67/e dated 27th august, 1981, the entire indian penal code had been extended to the exclusive economic zone and the territorial jurisdiction of the state of kerala was not limited to 12 nautical miles only.
the learned single judge also held that under the provisions of the sua act, the state of kerala has jurisdiction upto 200 nautical miles from the indian coast, falling within the exclusive economic zone of india.
10. aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of the kerala high court, the petitioners filed special leave petition  civil  number20370 of 2012, challenging the order of dismissal of their writ petition by the kerala high court.
11.
as will be evident from what has been narrated hereinabove, the subject matter and the reliefs prayed for in writ petition  civil number4542 of 2012 before the kerala high court and s.l.p.
c  number20370 of 2012 are the same as those sought in writ petition  civil  number135 of 2012.
12.
accordingly, the special leave petition and the writ petition have been heard together.
13. simply stated, the case of the petitioners is, that the petitioner numbers2 and 3, had been discharging their duties as members of the italian armed forces, in accordance with the principles of public international law and an italian national law requiring the presence of armed personnel on board commercial vessels to protect them from attacks of piracy.
it is also the petitioners case that the determination of international disputes and responsibilities as well as proceedings connected therewith, must necessarily be between the sovereign governments of the two countries and not constituent elements of a federal structure.
in other words, in cases of international disputes, the state units governments within a federal structure, could not be regarded as entities entitled to maintain or participate in proceedings relating to the sovereign acts of one nation against another, nor could such status be conferred upon them by the federal central government.
it is also the case of the writ petitioners that the proceedings, if any, in such cases, could only be initiated by the union at its discretion.
consequently, the arrest and continued detention of the petitioner numbers2 and 3 by the state of kerala is unlawful and based on a misconception of the law relating to disputes between two sovereign nations.
14.
appearing for the writ petitioners, mr. harish n. salve, learned senior advocate, contended that the acquiescence of the union of india to the unlawful arrest and detention of the petitioner numbers2 and 3 by the state of kerala was in violation of the long standing customary international law, principles of international comity and sovereign equality amongst states, as contained in the united nations general assembly resolution titled declaration on principles of international law concerning friendly relations and cooperation between states in accordance with the charter of the united nations.
mr. salve contended that these aforesaid principles require that any proceeding, whether diplomatic or judicial, where the conduct of a foreign nation in the exercise of its sovereign functions is questioned, has to be conducted only at the level of the federal or central government and could not be the subject matter of a proceeding initiated by a provincial state government.
15.
mr. salve submitted that the incident which occurred on 15th february, 2012, was an incident between two nation states and any dispute arising therefrom would be governed by the principles of international legal responsibility under which the rights and obligations of the parties will be those existing between the republic of india and the republic of italy.
mr. salve submitted that no legal relationship exists between the republic of italy and the state of kerala and by continued detention of the members of the armed forces of the republic of italy, acting in discharge of their official duties, the state of kerala had acted in a manner contrary to public international law, as well as the provisions of the constitution of india.
16. learned counsel submitted that the scheme of the territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones act, 1976, hereinafter referred to as the maritime zones act, 1976, contemplates limited jurisdiction of the central government over each of the maritime zones divided into the territorial waters, the contiguous zones and the exclusive economic zones.
learned counsel also submitted that sections 3, 5, 7 and 15 of the act contemplate the existence of such division of zones as a direct consequence of rights guaranteed under public international law, including the united nations convention on the law of the sea, hereinafter referred to as, the unclos.
17.
mr. salve submitted that the extent of jurisdiction of a state beyond its coastline is provided in section 3 of the maritime zones act, 1976.
sub-section  2  of section 3 indicates that the limit of the territorial waters is the line every point of which is at a distance of twelve nautical miles from the nearest point of the appropriate baseline.
section 5 of the aforesaid act provides that the contiguous zone of india is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial waters and the limit of the contiguous zone is the line every point of which is at a distance of twenty-four nautical miles from the nearest point of the baseline referred to in sub-section  2  of section 3. section 7 of the act defines exclusive economic zone as an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial waters, and the limit of such zone is two hundred nautical miles from the baseline referred to in sub- section  2  of section 3. in respect of each of the three above-mentioned zones, the central government has been empowered whenever it considers necessary so to do, having regard to international law and state practice, alter, by notification in the official gazette, the limit of the said zones.
18.
mr. salve pointed out that section 4 of the maritime zones act, 1976, specially provides for use of territorial waters by foreign ships and in terms of sub-section  1 , all foreign ships  other than warships including sub-marines and other underwater vehicles  are entitled to a right of innocent passage through the territorial waters, so long as such passage was innocent and not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of india.
19.
apart from the above, mr. salve also pointed out that section 6 of the aforesaid act provides that the continental shelf of india comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond the limit of its territorial waters throughout the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin or to a distance of two hundred nautical miles from the baseline referred to in sub-section  2  of section 3, where the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance.
sub-section  2  provides that india has and always had full and exclusive sovereign rights in respect of its continental shelf.
20.
according to mr. salve, the incident having occurred at a place which was 20.5 nautical miles from the coast of india, it was outside the territorial waters though within the contiguous zone and the exclusive economic zone, as indicated hereinabove.
accordingly, by no means could it be said that the incident occurred within the jurisdiction of one of the federal units of the union of india.
mr. salve urged that the incident, therefore, occurred in a zone in which the central government is entitled under the maritime zones act, 1976, as well as unclos, to exercise sovereign rights, not amounting to sovereignty.
mr. salve submitted that the act nowhere contemplates conferral of jurisdiction on any coastal unit forming part of any maritime zone adjacent to its coast.
accordingly, the arrest and detention of the petitioner numbers2 and 3 by the police authorities in the state of kerala was unlawful and was liable to be quashed.
mr. salve also went on to urge that notwithstanding the provisions of the maritime zones act, 1976, india, as a signatory of the unclos, is also bound by the provisions thereof.
submitting that since the provisions of the 1976 act and also unclos recognise the primacy of flag state jurisdiction, the petitioner number1 i.e. the republic of italy, has the preemptive right to try the petitioner numbers2 and 3 under its local laws.
21.
mr. salve submitted that provisions, similar to those in the maritime zones act, 1976, relating to the extent of territorial waters and internal waters and the right of innocent passage, are provided in articles 8, 17 and 18 of the convention.
mr. salve submitted that article 17 sets down in clear terms that subject to the convention, ships of all states, whether coastal or land-locked, enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea.
innocent passage has been defined in article 18 to mean navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose of  a  traversing that sea without entering internal waters or calling at a roadstead or part facility outside internal waters or  b  proceeding to or from internal waters or a call at such roadstead or part facility.
22.
the said definition has been qualified to indicate that such passage would be continuous and expeditious, but would include stopping and anchoring, only in so far as the same are incidental to ordinary navigation or are rendered necessary for force majeure or distress or for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships or aircraft in danger or distress.
mr. salve pointed out that article 19 describes innocent passage to be such so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal state and takes place in conformity with the convention and other rules of international law.
learned counsel pointed out that article 24 of the convention contained an assurance that the coastal states would not hamper the innocent passage of foreign ships through the territorial sea, except in accordance with the convention.
23.
as to criminal jurisdiction on board a foreign ship, mr. salve referred to article 27 of unclos, which provides that the criminal jurisdiction of the coastal state should not be exercised on board a foreign ship passing through the territorial sea to arrest any person or to conduct any investigation in connection with any crime committed on board the ship during its passage, save only in cases where the consequences of the crime extend to the coastal state if the crime is of a kind to disturb the peace of the country or the good order of the territorial sea if the assistance of the local authorities has been requested by the master of the ship or by a diplomatic agent or consular officer of the flag state, or if such measures are necessary for the suppression of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.
mr. salve, however, urged that none of the aforesaid conditions were attracted in the facts of this case so as to attract the criminal jurisdiction of a state within the federal structure of the union of india.
24.
another article of some significance is article 33 of the convention under section 4, which deals with contiguous zones.
mr. salve submitted that article 33 provides that in a zone contiguous to its territorial sea, a coastal state may exercise the control necessary to  i  prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial sea ii punish infringement of the above laws and regulations committed within its territory or territorial sea.
however, the contiguous zone may not extend beyond 24 nautical miles from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
accordingly, since the incident occurred outside the territorial waters, the state of kerala exceeded its jurisdiction and authority in acting on the basis of the fir lodged against the petitioner numbers2 and 3 at neendakara, kollam, and in keeping them in continued detention.
25. referring to part v of the convention, which deals with exclusive economic zones, mr. salve pointed out that article 56 under the said part indicates the rights, jurisdiction and duties of the coastal state in the exclusive economic zone so as to include the states sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving and managing the natural resources, whether living or non-living, of the waters superjacent to the seabed and of the seabed and its subsoil, and with regard to other activities for the economic exploitation and exploration of the zone, such as the production of energy from the water, currents and winds.
the said article also indicates that the state has jurisdiction in regard to  i  the establishment and use of artificial islands, installations and structures  ii  marine scientific research  iii the protection and preservation of the marine environment and other rights and duties provided for in the convention.
in regard to artificial islands, mr. salve pointed out that under clause 8 of article 59, artificial islands, installations and structures do not possess the status of islands.
they have no territorial sea of their own and their presence does not affect the delimitation of the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone or the continental shelf.
26.
dealing with the concept of high seas, contained in part vii of the convention, mr. salve submitted that articles 88 and 89 of the convention provide that the high seas have to be reserved for peaceful purposes and that no state may validly purport to subject any part of the same to its sovereignty.
mr. salve submitted that under articles 91, 92 and 94 of the convention, every state was entitled to fix the conditions for the grant of its nationality to ships, for the registration of ships in its territory, and for the right to fly its flag.
article 91 provides that ships have the nationality of the state whose flag they are entitled to fly and there must exist a genuine link between the state and the ship.
mr. salve pointed out that article 94 casts several duties on the flag state and one of the most significant clauses of article 94 is clause 7 which provides that each state shall cause an inquiry to be held by or before a suitably qualified person or persons into every marine casualty or incident of navigation  emphasis supplied  on the high seas involving a ship flying its flag and causing loss of life or serious injury to nationals of another state or serious damage to ships or installations of another state or to the marine environment.
the flag state and the other state shall cooperate in the conduct of any inquiry held by the concerned state into any such marine casualty or incident of navigation.
the same provisions are also reflected in article 97 of the convention, in which it has been indicated that in the event of a collision or any other incident of navigation concerning a ship on the high seas, involving the penal or disciplinary responsibility of the master or of any other person in the service of the ship, no penal or disciplinary proceedings may be instituted against such person except before the judicial or administrative authorities either of the flag state or of the state of which such person is a national.
27.
lastly, mr. salve referred to article 100, which may be of relevance to the facts of this case, as it requires all states to cooperate to the fullest extent in the repression of piracy on the high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any state.
28.
mr. salve submitted that the publication of a notification by the ministry of home affairs on 27th august, 1981, under sub-section  7  of section 7 of the maritime zones act, 1976, extending the application of section 188 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973, to the exclusive economic zone, created various difficulties, since the said notification was a departure from the provisions of part v of unclos which provides that a coastal state enjoys only sovereign rights and not sovereignty over the exclusive economic zone.
29.
referring to the interim report of the ministry of shipping, government of india, in respect of the incident, mr. salve pointed out that the fishing boat, mfb st. antony, about 12 meters long, was owned by one mr. freidy, who was also working as the sarang of the boat, which is registered at colachel, kanyakumari district, tamil nadu, by the assistant director of fisheries.
the crew of the boat were issued identity cards by the trivandrum matsyathozhilali forum, but the fishing boat is not registered under the indian merchant shipping act, 1958, and was not flying the indian flag at the time of the incident.
furthermore, at the time of the incident, the ship was at a minimum distance of about 20 nautical miles from the indian coast.
the ship was coasting in indian territorial waters in order to avoid any encounter with pirate boats as the area was declared to be a high risk area of piracy.
mr. salve urged that in the report it was also indicated that the area comes under the high alert zone for piracy attacks, as declared by the ukmto, and the watch officers were maintaining their normal pirate watch.
apart from the normal navigational watch keepers, the ship also had nmp marines on the bridge on anti-pirate watch as stated by the second mate and master.
the nmp marines were keeping their own watch as per their schedule and it was not the responsibility of the master to keep track of their regimen.
the nmp marines were supposed to take independent decisions as per article 5 of the agreement between the italian defence ministry and the italian ship owners association.
the report also indicated that the fishing boat came within a distance of 100 meters of the italian ship, causing the crew of the ship to believe that they were under pirate attack and in the circumstances of the moment the marines, who are independent of the orders of the master, opened fire, killing the two indian fishermen.
subsequently, while the ship was moving away, it received a phone call from the mrcc, mumbai duty controller, instructing the ship to proceed towards kochi anchorage to give a statement and witness with regard to the incident.
mr. salve submitted that pursuant thereto the italian vessel, instead of proceeding further into the high seas, returned to cochin port and was, thereafter, detained by the kerala police authorities.
mr. salve submitted that it was necessary to construe the provisions of the maritime zones act, 1976, in the light of the unclos, which gives rise to the question as to which of the provisions would have primacy in case of conflict.
30. referring to the decision of this court in aban loyd chiles offshore limited vs. union of india anr.   2008  11 scc 439, mr. salve submitted that in the said decision, this court had held that from a reading of sections 6 and 7 of the maritime zones act, 1976, it is clear that india has been given only certain limited sovereign rights in respect of its continental shelf and exclusive economic zone, which cannot be equated to extending the sovereignty of india over its continental shelf and exclusive economic zone, as in the case of territorial waters.
however, sections 6 6  and 7 7  of the maritime zones act, 1976, empower the central government, by notification, to extend the enactment in force in india, with such restrictions and modifications which it thinks fit, to its continental shelf and exclusive economic zone and also provides that an enactment so extended shall have effect as if the continental shelf or the exclusive economic zone, to which the act has been extended, is a part of the territory of india.
sections 6 6  and 7 7  create a fiction by which the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone are deemed to be a part of india for the purposes of such enactments which are extended to those areas by the central government by issuing a notification.
31.
mr. salve submitted that it was also held that the coastal state has no sovereignty in the territorial sense of dominion over contiguous zones, but it exercises sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring the continental shelf and exploiting its natural resources.
it has jurisdiction to enforce its fiscal, revenue and penal laws by intercepting vessels engaged in suspected smuggling or other illegal activities attributable to a violation of the existing laws.
the waters which extend beyond the contiguous zone are traditionally the domain of high seas or open sea which juristically speaking, enjoy the status of international waters where all states enjoy traditional high seas freedoms, including freedom of navigation.
the coastal states can exercise their right of search, seizure or confiscation of vessels for violation of its customs or fiscal or penal laws in the contiguous zone, but it cannot exercise these rights once the vessel in question enters the high seas, since it has no right of hot pursuit, except where the vessel is engaged in piratical acts, which make it liable for arrest and condemnation within the seas.
accordingly, although, the coastal states do not exercise sovereignty over the contiguous zone, they are entitled to exercise sovereign rights and take appropriate steps to protect its revenues and like matters.
32.
relying on the aforesaid observations made by this court in the aforesaid case, mr. salve submitted that the provisions of the maritime zones act, 1976, would have to be read in harmony with the provisions of unclos.
mr. salve submitted that the reference made in paragraphs 77 and 99 of the judgment dealt with policing powers in the designated areas of the contiguous zone for the application of the customs act and not as a reference to general policing powers exercised by the state police within the union of india.
mr. salve submitted that it would thus be clear, that if an offence was committed beyond the contiguous zone, the state concerned could not proceed beyond 24 nautical miles from the baseline in pursuit of the vessel alleged to have committed the offence.
mr. salve submitted that it was not contemplated under the maritime zones act, 1976, that the policing powers of a coastal state would proceed beyond the contiguous zone and into the exclusive economic zone or high seas, though certain provisions of the customs act and the customs tariff act had been extended to areas declared as designated areas under the said act.
33.
mr. salve contended that the stand of the union of india has been that the provisions of unclos cannot be applied in the facts of the case, since the maritime zones act, 1976, which is a domestic act, is a departure from unclos, and article 27 of unclos was not a part of the indian domestic law.
further, in anticipation of the submissions on behalf of the respondents, mr. salve urged that the judgment of the permanent court of international justice in the case of s.s. lotus  fr.
v. turk.    1927  p.c.i.j. which involved claims between france and turkey continued to be good law, save and except to the extent it had been overridden, but only in relation to collisions under article 97 of the unclos.
34.
mr. salve submitted that the aforesaid contentions made on behalf of the union of india were misconceived, because they were not taken earlier and were not to be found in the affidavit affirmed by the union of india.
mr. salve submitted that the maritime zones act, 1976, far from being a departure, is in complete conformity with the principles of unclos.
the act is limited to spelling out the geographical boundaries of the various zones, namely, the territorial waters, the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone, and the continental shelf, etc. and the nature of rights available to india in respect of each of the zones is spelled out in the act in a manner which is in complete conformity with the unclos.
mr. salve urged that india was not only a signatory to but had also ratified the convention.
the learned counsel submitted that the maritime zones act, 1976, was based, to a large extent, on the draft of unclos which had been prepared before 1976, but it is settled law in india that once a convention of this kind is ratified, the municipal law on similar issues should be construed in harmony with the convention, unless there were express provisions to the contrary.
35. simply stated, mr. salves submissions boil down to the question as to whether the sovereignty of india would extend to the exclusive economic zone, which extends to 200 nautical miles from the baseline of the coast of the state of kerala.
36.
mr. salve then urged that if sub-section  2  of section 4 i.p.c. was to be invoked by the union of india for exercising jurisdiction over a person present on a vessel flying the indian flag, it must respect a similar right asserted by other jurisdictions indicating that article 21 of the convention recognises the right of innocent passage which is to be respected by all nations, who are signatories to unclos.
as a result, if a vessel is in innocent passage and an incident occurs between two fo