--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

1 reportable inthesupremecourtofindia civilappellatejurisdiction civilappealno.10145of2016 nishansinghors.
appellant s  versus orientalinsurancecompanyltd.
throughregionalmanagerors.
.respondent s  judgment a.m.khanwilkar,j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

this appeal, by special leave, filed by the claimants assails the judgment and order of the high court of uttarakhandatnainitalinappealfromorderno.125of2015 dated5thmarch,2015,wherebytheappealwasdismissedand the order passed by the mact additional district judgeiii, rudrapur,udhamsinghnagar,dated10 thdecember,2014in motoraccidentclaimpetitionno.147of2012dismissingthe claimpetitiononthefindingthattheaccidentinquestionwas notonaccountofrashandnegligentdrivingoftruckbearing number u.p.32 z2397 but on account of rash and negligent drivingofmaruticarbearingno.u.p.02d5292resultingin deathofbalvinderkaurwhowassittinginthecardrivenby manjeetsingh,cametobeupheld.
2. brieflystated,appellantno.1assertedthatwhenhewas returninghometovillagebindukherawithhiswifebalvinder kaur,themotherofappellantnos.2to4,fromhismatrimonial home at village kuankhera, district bijnaur along with his cousin brothers manjeet singh and bittu and his son karanjeet singh on 28th november, 2010 in a maruti car bearing number u.p.02 d5292 which was being driven by manjeetsingh,sonofkashmirsingh,thesaidcarmetwithan accident causing serious injuries to the persons travelling therein,includingthedeathofbalvinderkaur.themaruticar haddashedagainsttruckbearingno.u.p.32z2397which wasrunningaheadofit.accordingtotheappellants,thetruck driver suddenly applied brake while the truck was in the centreoftheroad,bringingittotherightside,asaresultof which,themaruticarcollidedwiththetruckfromtheback.
balvinderkaureventuallysuccumbedtoherinjuriesonthe same day i.e. 28th november, 2010, while she was being treatedatgovt.hospital,kashipur.afterthat,anf.i.r.was registered on 4th december, 2010 at police station kunda, district udham singh nagar, bearing number93/10 u s 279 for offencespunishableundersections304a,337,338and427of ipc.theappellantsassertedthatbalvinderkaurwasgainfully employed and earned around rs.10,000/  rupees ten thousandonly permonthfromthedairybusiness.
3. ontheseassertions,aclaimpetitionwasfiledbeforethe motor accident claimstribunal additional districtjudgeiii rudrapur, udham singh nagar being m.a.c. case number147/2012.
appellant number1 who was travelling in the car along with his wife deposed before the tribunal.
appellants alsoexaminedmanjeetsinghwhowasdrivingthemaruticar bearing number u.p.02 d5292 at the relevant time.
the appellantsalsoreliedonthechargesheetfiledbythepolice against respondent number3  parasnath  driver of the offending truck.
4. therespondentscontestedtheclaimpetition.according to the respondents, the accident occurred due to the negligence of the driver ofthemaruticarandtherewasno negligenceonthepartofthetruckdriver.itwasassertedby the respondents that the truck driver had a valid driving licence.
further, the appellants had failed to implead the owneranddriverofthemaruticarwhowasresponsibleforthe accident and as such, no relief could be granted to the appellants.
5. thetribunalanalysedtheentireevidenceonrecordand answeredtheissueastowhetherthetruckwasbeingdriven in rash and negligent manner against the appellants.
the tribunalinsteadheldthattheaccidentoccurredduetorash and negligent driving by the driver of the maruti car.
the tribunal, therefore, concludedthatthe truckdriver and the insurer of the truckwerenotliabletopaycompensationas claimed.
the tribunal noted the issue of contributory negligencebut,havingregardtothefactsofthepresentcase and particularly because the owner and the driver of the maruticarwerenotmadeparties,itheldthattheappellants werenotentitledtoanyrelief.thetribunalalsonotedthatthe maruticarwaspurchasedbymanjeetsinghabout11years beforetheaccidentbutthesamewasnottransferredinhis namenorwasitinsured.takinganoverallviewofthematter, thetribunaldismissedtheclaimpetitionvidejudgmentdated 10thdecember,2014.
6. the appellants carried the matter in appeal before the high court of uttarakhand at nainital.
the high court summarily dismissed the appeal by reiterating the finding recorded by the tribunal that the evidence clearly indicated that the driver of the maruti car himself was negligent in drivinghisvehicleandhadfailedtokeepsufficientdistance between the two vehicles running in the same direction.
furthermore, the maruti car driver, owner and concerned insurance company were not made parties to the claim petition.thehighcourt,thus,declinedtointerfereinthefirst appeal.
7. the appellants have assailed the aforementioned decisions in this appeal.
according to the appellants, the finding recorded by the tribunal and affirmed by the high court,thatthedriverofthemaruticarhadnotmaintained safedistancefromthetruckrunningaheadofthemaruticar inthesamedirection,isuntenable.theappellantshavealso assailed the finding of fact recorded by the tribunal and affirmedbythehighcourtthatthemaruticarwasdrivenina rashandnegligentmanner.itisurgedthatthefactthatthe maruticarwasnotregisteredinthenameofmanjeetsinghor thatthedocumentspertainingtothemaruticarandeventhe valid driving licence of the driver of maruti car was not brought on record, cannot denude the appellants to receive compensation due to contributory negligence of the truck driver.
further, the tribunal committed manifest error in recordingthefindingontheissueofcontributorynegligence against the appellants without framing any issue in that behalf.itisurgedthatthefindingsrecordedbythetribunalto absolvethetruckdriver,onthegroundthatthetruckwasnot driven rashly and negligently, is perverse and untenable in law.
moreover, the tribunalhascompletely glossedover the efficacy of the chargesheet filed by the police against respondent number3 truck driver after due investigation.
the appellants have also reiterated their claim regarding compensation,ontheassertionthatdeceasedbalvinderkaur wasearningaroundrs.10,000/ rupeestenthousandonly  per month and after her death, her family was facing grave hardship.accordingtotheappellants,thetribunalaswellas thehighcourthaddealtwiththematterinahypertechnical manneranddidnotappreciatetheevidenceonthebasisof preponderanceofprobabilities.
8. therespondents,ontheotherhand,havesupportedthe finding of fact recorded by the tribunal, that the accident occurred not because of rash and negligent driving of the truckbutwasonaccountofrashandnegligentdrivingbythe driver of the maruti car.
on that finding, contends learned counselfortherespondents,noliabilitycanbefastenedonthe respondents.
hesubmittedthattheanalysisoftheevidence onrecordbythetribunalandaffirmedbythehighcourtdoes notwarrantanyinterference.therespondentshavesupported theconclusionsrecordedbythetribunalandaffirmedbythe highcourtfordismissingtheclaimpetition.
9. we have heard mr. vijay prakash, learned counsel appearing for the appellants and mr. k.k.
bhat, learned counselfortherespondents.
10.
the moot question is whether the tribunal committed anyerrorinansweringissueno.1againsttheappellantsand infavour of the respondents.thetribunal,whileanswering the said issue number1, analysed the evidence, both oral and documentary, including the chargesheet filed by the appellantsandobservedthus 20.
insite plan paper number6c/6 which is filedon record, thebreadthoftheroadinquestionappearstobe14feetand about7stepskachchalekhappearsatthebothsidesofthe road.thisfactisremarkablethatthesaidaccidentisnotof front accident but the accident occurred as a result of collisionofthemaruticarontherearpartofthetruckin questionbythedriverofthecarinquestionandthesame factisalsomentionedintheevidenceofthepetitioners.pw 2manjeetsinghdriverofthecarinquestionasstatedinhis cross examination that he was driving the car behind the truckatthedistanceofabout1015feet.despitetherebeing thebreadthoftheroad14feetpucca,thedriverofthecarin questionkeptthevehicleonlyatthedistanceof1015feet from the truck which doesnt appear in accordance with trafficrules.heshouldhavedriventhevehiclemaintaining the proper distance in order to escape from each circumstancebuthehasadmittedinhiscrossexamination as pw2 that , he knows that he should maintain proper distancefromtheheavyvehicle.undersuchcircumstanceif thevehiclewhichisrunningbehindtheheavyvehicle,must maintain the proper distance if the proper distance is not maintainthenthewholenegligenceshallbedeterminedon the part of rear vehicle in regard to the occurrence of accidentinquestion.inadditionnoevidenceinregardtothe seizingoftruckinquestionontheplaceofoccurrenceand taking into police custody the vehicles from the place of occurrence and getting done their technical survey is not availableonplaceofoccurrence.
21.
by the facts mentioned in the petition and by the evidence of pw1 and pw2 it doesnt appear reliable that rashandnegligentdrivingintheaccidentinquestionwason thepartofthedriverofthetruckinquestionandforthis purpose only by registering of f.i.r.
of said accident and submittingofchargesheetagainstthedriverofthetruckin question,thedriverofthetruckinquestioncannotbeheld guiltyforthesaidaccident,whereasbytheevidenceofthe petitioner on record this fact comes forward that the accidentoccurredasthedriver ofthecarinquestionwas not driving the car in question in accordance with traffic rulesi.e.theaccidentoccurredasthevehiclewasnotbeing driven maintaining proper distance from the truck and it appearsclearlythatthespeedofthecarwouldhavebeen fastwherebythecarinquestioncollidedwiththerearpartof thetruckinquestionbeinguncontrolledandsaidaccident tookplace.undersuchcircumstancetherewasnorashand negligenceonthepartofthedriveroftruckbearingno.u.p.
32z2397regardingtheaccidentinquestionbutthesame isdeterminedonthepartofmanjeetsinghdriverofmaruti carbearingno.u.p.02d5292.
22. onthebasisoftheaforesaidinterpretationitappears thatthesaidaccidentdidntoccuron28.11.2010atabout 645 p.m. at village kunda kashipurjashpur road under areaofp.s.kundadistrictudhamsinghnagarbythedriver of the truck bearing number u.p.32 z2397 due to rash and negligentdrivingofthetruckandbyapplyingsuddenbreak butitoccurredasaresultofrashandnegligentdrivingof maruti car bearing number u.p.02 d5292 in question by manjeet singh driver, wherein balvinder kaur who was sitting in the car sustained serious injuries and expired duringhertreatmentonaccountofseriousinjuries.
thefindingsorecordedbythetribunalhasbeenaffirmedby the high court, by observing that the evidence was clearly indicativeofthefactthatthemaruticarwasbeingdrivenina rashandnegligentmanner,whichwasthecauseforaccident ofthisnatureandresultingindeathofoneofthepassengers inthemaruticar.themaruticarwasdrivenbynoneother than pw2 manjeet singh.inhisevidence,he has admitted thatthesubjecttruckwasrunningaheadofthemaruticarfor quite some time about one kilometre and at the time of accident,thedistancebetweenthetruckandmaruticarwas only1015feet.hehasalsoadmittedthatthelawmandates maintainingsufficientdistancebetweentwovehiclesrunning inthesamedirection.itisalsonotindisputethattheroadon which the two vehicles were moving was only about 14 feet wide.
it is unfathomable that on such a narrow road, the subjecttruckwouldmoveatahighspeedasalleged.inany case, the maruti car which was following the truck was expected to maintain a safe distance, as envisaged in regulation 23 of the rules of the road regulations, 1989, whichreadsthus 23.
distancefromvehiclesinfront.thedriverofamotor vehicle moving behind another vehicle shall keep at a sufficientdistancefromthatothervehicletoavoidcollisionif thevehicleinfrontshouldsuddenlyslowdownorstop.
theexpressionsufficientdistancehasnotbeendefinedinthe regulations or elsewhere.
the thumb rule of sufficient distanceisatleastasafedistanceoftwotothreesecondsgap inidealconditionstoavertcollisionandtoallowthefollowing drivertimetorespond.thedistanceof1015feetbetweenthe truck and maruti car was certainly not a safe distance for which the driver of the maruti car must take the blame.
it must necessarily follow that the finding on the issue under considerationoughttobeagainsttheclaimants.
11. thetribunalalsonotedthattherewasnoevidenceon recordtoindicatethatthedriverofthetrucksuddenlyapplied hisbrakeinthemiddleoftheroad.further,thefindingon issue number1 recorded by the tribunal is that there was no evidenceregardingexactplaceofoccurrenceofaccidentand havingtakensurvey.therefore,theissueunderconsideration wasansweredagainsttheappellants claimants ,namely,that thesubjecttruckwasnotdrivenrashlyandnegligentlybythe truckdrivernorhadhebroughtthetruckinthecentreofthe roadatrightsideorappliedsuddenbrakeasbeingthecause of the accident.
being a concurrent finding of fact and a possibleview,needsnointerference.
12.
thenextquestioniswhetherthetribunalshouldhaveat least answered the issue of contributory negligence of the truck driver in favour of the appellants  claimants .
the question of contributory negligence would arise when both partiesareinvolvedintheaccidentduetorashandnegligent driving.inacasesuchasthepresentone,whenthemaruti carwasfollowingthetruckandnofaultcanbeattributedto the truck driver, the blame must rest on the driver of the maruticarforhavingdrivenhisvehiclerashlyandnegligently.
thehighcourthasjustlytakennoteofthefactthatthedriver andownerofthemaruticar,aswellasinsurerofthatvehicle, hadnotbeenimpleadedaspartiestotheclaimpetition.the tribunalhasalsotakennoteofthefactthatinallprobability, thedriverandownerofthemaruticarwerenotmadeparty beingcloserelativesoftheappellants.insuchasituation,the issueofcontributorynegligencecannotbetakenforward.
13.
however,eveninsuchacase,thetribunalcouldhave beenwelladvisedtoinvokesection140ofthemotorvehicles act, 1988,  for short the act  providing for liability of the ownerofthevehicle subjecttruck involvedintheaccident.it isawellsettledpositionthatfasteningliabilityundersection 140oftheactontheownerofthevehicleisregardlessofthe fact that the subject vehicle was not driven rashly and negligently.
we may usefullyrefer tothedecisionsin indra devi and others vs. bagada ram and another1 and  2010 13scc249 eshwarappaaliasmaheshwarappaandanothervs.c.s. gurushanthappa and another2, which are directly on the point.
14.
accordingly,eventhoughtheappealfailsinsofarasclaim petition under section 166 of the act, for the appellants havingfailedtosubstantiatethefactumofrashandnegligent drivingbythedriverofthesubjecttruck,theappellantsmust succeed in this appeal to the limited extent of relief under section140oftheact.wehavenohesitationinmouldingthe reliefonthatbasis.
15. for the reasons mentioned above, this appeal is partly allowed.
the appellants are granted limited relief under section140oftheact.therespondentnos.2and3aremade jointly and severally liable to pay a sum of rs.50,000/  rupees fifty thousand only  to the appellants towards compensationundersection140oftheact,onaccountofthe deathofbalvinderkaurintheaccidentwhichoccurredon28 th  2010 8scc620 november,2010,alongwithinterestattherateof9fromthe dateoffilingoftheclaimpetitiontillrealization.
16. theappealispartlyallowedintheabovetermswithno orderastocosts.
cji.  dipakmisra  j.  a.m.khanwilkar  j.  dr.d.y.chandrachud  newdelhi april27,2018.