--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

case number writ petition  civil  200 of 1995 petitioner supreme court bar association respondent union of india anr.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

date of judgment 17/04/1998 bench s.c.agrawal g.n.ray a.s.anand s.p.bharucha s.rajendra babu judgment judgment delivered by a.s.anand, j. dr.a.s.anand.
j. in re vinay chandra mishra,  1995  2 scc 584, this court found the contemner, an advocate, guilty of committing criminal contempt of court for having interfered with and obstructing the course of justice by trying to threaten, overawe and overbear the court by using insulting, disrespectful and threatening language, while awarding punishment, keeping in view the gravity of the contumacious conduct of the contemner, the court said the facts and circumstances of the present case justify our invoking the power under article 129 read with article 142 of the constitution to award to the contemner a suspended sentence of imprisonment together with suspension of his practice as and advocate in the manner directed herein.
we accordingly sentence the contemner for his conviction for the offence of the criminal contempt as under  a  the contemner vinay chandra mishra is hereby sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six weeks.
however, in the circumstances of the case, the sentence will remain suspended for a period of four years and may be activated in case the contemner is convicted for any other offence of contempt of court within the said period and  b  the contemner shall stand suspended from practising as an advocate fro a period of three years from today with the consequence that all held by him in his capacity as an advocate, shall stand vacated by him forthwith.
aggrieved by the direction that the contemner shall stand suspended from practising as an advocate for a period of three years issued by this court by invoking powers under articles 129 and 142 of the constitution, the supreme court bar association, through its honorary secretary, has filed this petition under article 32 of the constitution of india, seeking the following relief issue and appropriate writ, direction, or declaration, declaring that the disciplinary committees of the bar councils set up under the advocates act, 1961, alone have exclusive jurisdiction to inquire into and suspend or debar an advocate from practising law for professional or other misconduct, arising out of punishment imposed for contempt of court or otherwise and further declare that the supreme court of india or any high court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction has no such original jurisdiction, power or authority in that regard notwithstanding the contrary view held by this honble court in contempt petition  crl.  number 3 of 1994 dated 10.3.1995.
on 21.3.1995, while issuing rule in the writ petition, following order was made by the division bench the question which arises is whether the supreme court of india can while dealing with contempt proceedings exercise power under article 129 of the constitution or under article 129 read with article 142 of the constitution or under article 142 of the constitution can debar a practicing lawyer from carrying on his profession as a lawyer for any period whatsoever, we direct notice to issue on the attorney general of india and on the respondents herein.
notice will also issue on the application for interim stay.
having regarding to the importance of the aforesaid question we further direct that this petition be placed before a constitution bench of this court.
that is how this writ petition has been placed before this constitution bench.
the only question which we are called upon to decide in this petition is whether the punishment for established contempt of court committed by an advocate can include punishment to debar the concerned advocate from practice by suspending his licence  sanad  for a specified period, in exercise of its powers under article 129 read with article 142 of the constitution of india.
dealing with this issue, the three judge bench in vinay chandra mishras case  supra , opined the question now is what punishment should be meted out to the contemner.
we have already discussed the contempt jurisdiction of this court under article 129 of the constitution.
that jurisdiction is independent of the statutory law of contempt enacted by parliament under entry 77 of list i of seventh schedule of the constitution.
the jurisdiction of this court, under article 129 is sui generis.
the jurisdiction to take cognizance of the contempt as well as to award punishment for it being constitutional, it cannot be controlled by any statute.
neither, therefore, the contempt of courts act, 1971 nor the advocates act, 1981 can be pressed into service to restrict the said jurisdiction.
the court repelled the arguments advanced on behalf of the contemner, the u.p. bar association and the u.p. bar council, that the court cannot while publishing the contemner with any of the traditional or accepted punishments for contempt, also suspend his licence to practice as an advocate.
since that power is specifically entrusted by the advocates act, 1961 to the disciplinary committees of the state bar council and or the bar council of india.
the bench opined what is further, the jurisdiction and powers of this court under article 142 which are supplementary in nature and are provided to do complete justice in any matter, are independent of the jurisdiction and powers of this court under article 129 which cannot be trammeled in any way by any statutory provision including the provisions of the advocates act or the contempt jurisdiction of the court including of this court and the contempt of courts act, 1971 being a statute cannot denude, restrict or limit the powers of this court to take action for contempt under article 129.
mr. kapil sibal, learned senior counsel appearing for the supreme court bar association, and dr. rajiv dhawan, senior advocate appearing for the bar council of u.p. and bar council of india assailed the correctness of the above findings and submitted that powers conferred on this court by article 142, though very wide in their aptitude, can be exercised only to do complete justice in any case or cause pending before it and since the issue of professional misconduct is not the subject matter of any cause pending before this court while dealing with a case of contempt of court, it could not make any order either under article 142 or 129 to suspend the licence of an advocate contemner, for which punishment, statutory provisions otherwise exist.
according to the learned counsel, a court of record under article 129 of the constitution does not have any power to suspend the licence of a lawyer to practice because that is not a punishment which can be imposed under its jurisdiction to punish for contempt of court and that article 142 of the constitution cannot also be pressed into aid to make an order which has the effect of assuming jurisdiction which expressly vests in another statutory body constituted under the advocates act, 1961.
the learned solicitor general submitted that under article 129 read with article 142 of the constitution, this court can neither create a jurisdiction nor created a punishment not otherwise permitted by law and that since the power to punish an advocate  for professional misconduct  by suspending his licence vests exclusively in a statutory body constituted under the advocates act, this court cannot assume that jurisdiction under article 142 or 129 or even under section 38 of the advocates act, 1961.
to appreciate the submissions raised at the bar, let us first notice article 129 of the constitution, it reads 129.
supreme court to be a court of record.- the supreme court shall be a court of record and shall have all the power of such a court including the power of punish for contempt of itself.
the article on its plain language vests this court with all the powers of a court of record including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
the expression court of record has not been defined in the constitution of india.
article 129 however, declares the supreme court to be a court of record, while article 216 declares a high court also to be a court of record.
a court of record is a court, the records of which are admitted to be of evidentiary value and are not to be questioned when produced before any court.
the power that courts of record enjoy to punish for contempt is a part of their inherent jurisdiction and is essential to enable the courts to administer justice according to law in a regular, orderly and effective manner and to uphold the majesty of law and prevent interference in the due administration of justice.
according to jowitt, dictionary of english law, first edition  p. 526  a court of record has been defined as a court whereof the acts and judicial proceedings are enrolled for a perpetual memory and testimony, and which has power to fine and imprison for contempt of its authority.
whartons law lexicon, explains a court of record as- record, courts of, those whose judicial acts and proceedings are enrolled on parchment, for a perpetual memorial and testimony which rolls are called the records of the courts, and are of such high and supereminent authority that their truth is not to be called in question.
courts of record are of two classes - superior and inferior.
superior courts of record include the house of lords, the judicial committee, the court of appeal, the high court, and a few others.
the mayors court of london, the country courts, coroners courts, and other are inferior courts , coroners courts, and other are inferior courts, coroners courts, and other are inferior courts of record, of which the country courts are the most important.
every superior court of record has authority to fine and imprison for contempt of its authority an inferior court of record can only commit for contempts committed in open courts, in facie curice.   emphasis provided  nigel lowe and brenda sufrin in their treatise on the law of contempt  third edition   butterworths 1996 , while dealing with the jurisdiction and powers of a courts of record in respect of criminal contempt say the contempt jurisdiction of courts of record forms part of their inherent jurisdiction.
the power that courts of record enjoy to punish contempts is part of their inherent jurisdiction.
the juridical basis of the inherent jurisdiction has been well described by master jacob as being the authority of the judiciary to uphold, to protect and to fulfil the judicial function of administering justice according to law in a regular, orderly and effective manner.
such a power is not derived from statute nor truly from the common law but instead flows from the very concept of a court of law.
---------------- all courts of record have an inherent jurisdiction to punish contempts committed in their face but the inherent power to punish contempts committed outside the court resides exclusively in superior courts of record.
------------------------ superior courts of records have an inherent superintendent jurisdiction to punish contempts committed in connection with proceedings before inferior courts.   emphasis ours  entry 77 of list i of the seventh schedule of the constitution provides for constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the supreme court  including contempt of such court , and the fees taken therein persons entitled to practice before the supreme court.
entry 14 iii of the seventh schedule provides for legislation in respect of contempt of court, but not including contempt of the supreme court.
the language of entry 77 of list i and entry 14 of list iii of the seventh schedule demonstrate that the legislative power of the parliament and of the state legislature extends to legislate with respect to matters connected with contempt of court by the supreme court or the high court, subject however, to the qualification that such legislation cannot denude, abrogate or nullify, the power of the supreme court to punish for contempt under articles 129 or vest that power in some other court.
besides, articles 129, the power to punish for contempt is also vested in the supreme court by virtue of article 142 2 .
article 142 of the constitution reads- 142.
enforcement of decrees and orders of supreme court and orders as to discovery, etc. -  1  the supreme court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before, it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall to enforceable throughout the territory of india in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the president may by order prescribe.   2  subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by parliament, the supreme court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of india, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself.
it is, thus, seen that the power of this court in respect of investigation or punishment of any contempt including contempt of itself, is expressly made subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by the parliament by article 142 2 .
however, the power to punish for contempt being inherent in a court of record, it follows that no act of parliament can take away that inherent jurisdiction of the court of record to punish for contempt and the parliaments power of legislation on the subject cannot, therefore, be so exercised as to stultify the status and dignity of the supreme court and or the high courts, though such a legislation may serve as a guide for the determination of the nature of punishment which this court may impose in the case of established contempt.
parliament has not enacted any law dealing with the powers of the supreme court with regard to investigation and punishment of contempt of itself.   we shall refer to section 15 of t he contempt of courts act, 1971, later on  and this court, therefore exercises the power to investigate and punish for contempt of itself by virtue of the powers vested in it under articles 129 and 142 2  of the constitution of india.
the first legislation to deal with contempt of courts in this country was the contempt of courts act, 1926.
it was enacted with a view to define and limit the powers of certain courts for punishing contempts of court.
the preamble to that act stated whereas doubts have arisen as to the powers of a high court of judicature to punish contempt of courts and whereas it is expedient to resolve these doubts and to define and limit the powers exercisable by high courts and chief courts in punishing contempts of court it is hereby enacted as follows section 2 says - subject to the provisions of sub-section  3 , the high courts of judicature established by letters patent shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction, powers and authority in accordance with the same procedure and practice, in respect of contempts of courts subordinate to them as they have and exercise in respect of contempts of themselves.
since, the act was enacted with a view to remove doubts about the powers of the high court to punish for contempt, it made no distinction between one letters patent high court and another though it did distinguish between the letter patent high courts and the chief courts.
the doubt, as a result of conflict of judicial opinion, whether the high court punish for contempt of a court subordinate to it, was removed by enactment of section 2 of the act  supra .
the contempt of courts act, 1926 was replaced by the contempt of courts act, 1952.
the 1952 act made the significant departures from the 1926 act, first, the expression high court was defined to include the courts of judicial commissioner which had been excluded from the purview of the 1926 act and secondly, the high courts, including the court of judicial commissioner which had been excluded from the purview of the 1920 act and secondly, the high courts including the court of judicial commissioner which had been excluded from the purview of the 1926 act and secondly, the high courts, including the court of a judicial commissioner, were conferred jurisdiction to inquire into and try contempt of itself or if any court subordinate to it.
irrespective of whether the contempt was alleged to have been committed within of outside the local limits of its jurisdiction and irrespective of whether the person alleged to be guilty of committing contempt was within or outside such limits.
in the matter of imposition of punishment for contempt of courts, section 4 of the 1952 act provided, sec.4 limit of punishment for contempt of court.
save as otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in force.
a contempt of court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both provided that the accused may be discharged or the punishment awarded may be remitted on apology being made to the satisfaction of the court provided further that not withstanding anything elsewhere contained in any law for the time being in force, no high court shall impose a sentence in excess of that specified in this section for any contempt either in respect of itself or of a court subordinate to it.
thus, under the existing legislation dealing with contempt of court, the high courts and chief courts were vested with the power to try a person for committing contempt of court and to punish him for established contempt.
the legislation itself prescribed the nature and type, as well as the extent of, punishment which could be imposed on a contemner by the high courts or the chief courts.
the second proviso to section 4 of the 1952 act  supra  expressly restricted the powers of the courts not to impose any sentence in excess of what is specified in the section for any contempt either of itself or of a court subordinate to it.
after the constitution of india was promulgated in 1950, it appears that on 1st of april, 1960, a bill was introduced in the lok sabha to consolidate and amend the law relating to contempt of court.
the bill was examined by the government which felt that law relating to contempt of courts was uncertain, undefined and unsatisfactory and that in the light of the constitutional changes which had taken place in the country, it was advisable to have to entire law on the subject scrutinised by a special committee to be set up for the purpose.
pursuant to that decision, the ministry of law on july 29, 1961 set up a committee under the chairmanship of shri h.n. sanyal, additional solicitor general of india.
the committee came to be known as sanyal committee and it was required  i  to examine the law relating to contempt of courts generally, and in particular, the law relating to the procedure for the punishment thereof  ii  to suggest amendments therein with a view to clarifying and reforming the law wherever necessary and  iii  to make recommendations, for codification of the law in the light of the examination made.
the committee inter-alia opined that parliament or the concerned legislature has the power to legislate in relation to the substantive law of contempt of the supreme court and the high courts subject only to the qualification that the legislature cannot take away the powers of the supreme court or the high court, as a court of record, to punish for contempt nor vest that power in some other court.
after the submission of the sanyal committee reports, the contempt of courts act, 1952 was repealed and replaced by the contempt of courts act, 1971 which act was enacted to define and limit the powers of certain courts in punishing contempt of courts and to regulate their procedure in relation thereto.
it would be proper to notice some of the relevant provisions of the 1971 act at this stage.
section 2  a ,  b  and  c  of the contempt of courts act, 1971 define contempt of court as follows- 2. definitions.
- in this act, unless the context otherwise requires,-  a  contempt of court means civil contempt or criminal contempt  b  civil contempt means willful disobedience to an judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a court or willful breach of an under taking given to a court  c  criminal contempt means the publication whether by words, spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise  of any matter or the doing of any other act whatsoever which-   i  scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or tends to lower the authority of any court, or  ii  prejudices, or interferes or tends to interfere with, the due course of any judicial proceedings or  iii  interferes or tends to interfere with or obstructs or tends to obstruct, the administration of justice in any other manner.
section 10 provides - sec.
10. power of high court to punish contempts of subordinate courts.
- every high court shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction, powers ad authority, in accordance jurisdiction, powers and authority, in accordance with the same procedure and practice, in respect of contempts of courts subordinate to it as it has and exercises in respect of contempts of itself provided that no high court shall take cognizance of a contempt alleged to have been committed in respect of a court subordinate to it where such contempt is an offence punishable under the indian panel code, 1860  45 of 1860 .
the punishment for committing contempt of court is provided in section 12 of the 1971 act which reads- 12.
punishment for contempt of court.
- 1  save as otherwise expressly provided in this act or in any other law, a contempt of court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both provided that the accused may be discharged or the punishment awarded my be remitted on apology being made to the satisfaction of the court.
explanation.- an apology shall not be rejected merely on the ground that it is qualified or conditional if the accused makes it bona fide.   2  notwithstanding any thing contained in any law for the time being in force, no court shall impose a sentence in excess of that specified in sub-section  1  for any contempt either in respect of itself or of a court subordinate to it.   3  notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a person is found guilty of a civil contempt, the court, if it considers that a fine will not meet the ends of justice and that a sentence of imprisonment is necessary, shall, instead of sentencing him to simple imprisonment, direct that he be detained in a civil prison for such period not exceeding six months as it may think fit.   4  where the person found guilty of contempt of court in respect of any undertaking given to a court is a company, every person who, at the time the contempt was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contempt and the punishment may be enforced, with the leave of the court, by the detention in civil prison of each such person- provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to such punishment if he proves that the contempt was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent its commission.   5  notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  4 , where the contempt of court referred to therein has been committed by a company and it is proved that the contempt has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contempt and the punishment may be enforced, with the leave of the court, by the detention in civil prison of such director, manager, secretary or other officer.
------------------- ------------------- an analysis of the above provision shows that sub- section  1  of section 12 provides that in a case of established contempt, the contemner may be punished  a  with simple imprisonment by detention in a civil prison or  b  with fine, or  c  with both.
a careful reading of sub-section  2  of section 12 reveals that the act places an embargo on the court not to impose a sentence in excess of the sentence prescribed under sub- section  1 .
a close scrutiny of sub-section  3  of section 12 demonstrates that the legislature intended that in the case of civil contempt a sentence of fine alone should be imposed except where the court considers that the ends of justice make it necessary to pass a sentence of imprisonment also.
dealing with imposition of punishment under section 12  3  of the act, in the case of smt.
pushpaben and another vs. narandas v. badiani and another.   1979  2 scc 394, this court opined a close and careful interpretation of the extracted section  section 12 3   leaves no room for doubt that the legislature intended that a sentence of fine alone should be imposed in normal circumstances.
the statute, however, confers special power on the court to pass a sentence of imprisonment if it thinks that ends of justice so require.
thus before a court passes the extreme sentence of imprisonment, it must give special reasons after a proper application of its mind that a sentence of imprisonment along is called for in a particular situation.
thus, the sentence of imprisonment is an exception while sentence of fine is the rule.
section 10 of the 1971 act like section 2 of the 1926 act and section 4 of the 1952 act recognises the power which a high court already possesses as a court of record for punishing for contempt of itself, which jurisdiction has now the sanction of the constitution also by virtue of article 215.
the act, however, does not deal with the powers of the supreme court to try or punish a contemner for committing contempt of the supreme court or the courts subordinate to it and the constitutional provision contained in articles 142 2  and 129 of the constitution alone deal with the subject.
in s.k. sarkar, member, board of revenue vs. vinay chandra misra,  1981  1 scc 436, this court opined articles 129 and 215 preserve all the powers of the supreme court and the high court, respectively, as a court of record which include the power to punish the contempt of itself.
as pointed out by this court in mohd.
ikram hussain v. state of u.p.  air 1964 sc 1625 , there are no curbs on the power of the high court to punish for contempt of itself except those contained in the contempt of courts act.
articles 129 and 215 do not define as to what constitutes contempt of court.
parliament has, by virtue of the aforesaid entries in list i and list iii of the seventh schedule, power to define and limit the powers of the courts in punishing contempt of court and to regulate their procedure in relation thereto.
indeed, this is what is stated in the preamble of the act of 1971.   emphasis supplied  in sukhdev singh v. honble c.j.s.
teja singh ors.
air 1954 scr 454, while recognising that the power of the high court to institute proceedings for contempt and punish the contemner when found necessary is a special jurisdiction which is inherent in all courts of record, the bench opined that the maximum punishment is now limited to six months simple imprisonment or a fine of rs. 2,000/- or both because of the provision of contempt of courts act.
in england, according to halsburys laws of england 4th edn.
para 97 there is no statutory limit to the length of the term of imprisonment which may be imposed for contempt of court by the court of appeal, high court or crown court.
similarly the statutory provisions relating to the suspension of sentences of imprisonment have no application to committals for contempt.
although there is no limit to the length of the term which may be imposed, the punishment should be commensurate to the offence.
thus, where contempt is committed owing to a mistaken view of the rights of the offender, the punishment, where imprisonment is deemed necessary, should be for a definite period and should not be severe.
paras 99 and 100 to 105 of halsburys laws deal with the other punishments which may be imposed for contempt of court.
99.
fines and security for good behavior.
the court may, as an alternative or in addition to committing a contemner, impose a fine or require security for good behavior.
as in the case of imprisonment, there is no statutory limit to the amount of a fine which the court can impose.
100.
other remedies.
as a further alternative to ordering committal, the court may, in its discretion, adopt the more lenient course of granting an injunction to restrain repetition of the act of contempt.
the court may also penalise a party in contempt by ordering him to pay the costs of the application.
103.
fine.
the court may, as an alternative to committal or sequestration, impose a fine for civil contempt.
in assessing the amount of the fine, account should be taken of the seriousness of the contempt and damage done to the public interest.
104.
other remedies.
the court may, in its own discretion, grant an injunction, in lieu of committal or sequestration, to restrain the commission or repetition of a civil contempt.
the court may in lieu of any other penalty require the contemner to pay the costs of the motion on a common fund basis.
105. costs.
the costs of an application for committal are in the discretion of the court, and should be asked for on the hearing of the application.
the respondent can as a general rule only be ordered to pay costs if he has been guilty of contempt.
an action is maintainable in the queens beach division to enforce an order made in the chancery division to pay the costs of a motion for committal.   emphasis supplied  thus, the recognised and accepted punishments for civil or criminal contempt of court in english law, which have been followed and accepted by the courts in this country and incorporated in the indian law in so far as, civil contempt, is concerned are i  sequestration of assets ii  fine iii  committal to prison the object of punishment being both curative and corrective these coercions are meant to assist an individual complainant to enforce his remedy and there is also an element of public policy for punishing civil contempt, since the administration of justice would be undermined if the order of any court of law is to be disregarded with impunity.
under some circumstances, compliance of the order may be secured without resort to coercion, through the contempt power.
for example, disobedience of an order to pay a sum of money may be effectively countered by attaching the earnings of the contemner.
in the same manner, committing the person of the defaulter to prison for failure to comply with an order of specific performance of conveyance of property, may be met also by the court directing that the conveyance be completed by an appointed person.
disobedience of an undertaking may in the like manner be enforced through process other than committal to prison as for example where the breach of undertaking is to deliver possession of property in a landlord tenant dispute.
apart from punishing the contemner the court to maintain the majesty of law may direct the police force to be utilised for recover of possession and burden the contemner with costs, exemplary or otherwise.
in so far as criminal contempt of court is concerned, which charge is required to be established like a criminal charge, it is punishable by  i  fine or  ii  by fixed period of simple imprisonment or detention in a civil prison for a specified period or  iii  both.
in deciding whether a contempt is serious enough to merit imprisonment, the court will take into account the likelihood of interference with the administration of justice and the culpability of the offender.
the intention with which the act complained of is done is a material factor in determining what punishment, in a given case, would be appropriate.
the nature and types of punishment which a court of record can impose, in a case of established contempt, under the common law have now been specifically incorporated in the contempt of courts act, 1971 in so far as the high courts are concerned and therefore to the extent the contempt of courts act 1971 identifies the nature of types of punishments which can be awarded in the case of established contempt, it does not impinge upon the inherent powers of the hig