--- PREAMBLE & CASE INFO ---

reportable in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal number6386 of 1983 mahant jawala singh chela of appellant mahant bishan singh  dead  through legal representative versus the shiromani gurdwara prabhandhak respondent committee, amritsar judgment g.s. singhvi, j. 1.

--- JUDGMENT BODY ---

this appeal is directed against judgment dated 13.9.1982 of the division bench of the punjab and haryana high court whereby the appeal preferred by mahant jawala singh  the appellant herein , who died during the pendency of the appeal before the high court and is now represented by his legal representative against the order passed by sikh gurdwara tribunal, chandigarh  for short, the tribunal  declaring gurdwara sri guru granth sahib situated within the revenue estate of village jalal, tehsil and district bhatinda as a sikh gurdwara was dismissed.
2. fifty-three persons claiming to be sikh worshippers submitted a petition to the state government under section 7 1  of the sikh gurdwaras act, 1925  for short, the act  for declaring the institution in question as a sikh gurdwara was published in the punjab government gazette vide notification number385-g.p.
dated 25.1.1963 issued under section 7 3  of the act.
in response to the aforesaid notification, four separate petitions were filed under section 8 of the act.
one of the petitions was filed by the appellant.
in paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 of his petition, the appellant averred as under  2  that the petitioner is a hereditary office-holder of the said dera and is above 21 years of age and is thus entitled to forward this petition under section 8 of the act.   3  that the said dera now described as gurdwara sri guru granth sahib in the above-said notification is not at all a sikh gurdwara.
it was not established by or in memory of any of the ten sikh gurus or in commemoration of any incident in the life of any of the ten sikh gurus or in memory of any sikh martyr, saint or historical person and has never been used for public worship by sikhs owing to any tradition connected with any of the ten sikh gurus or the sikh religion nor was established for use by sikhs for purposes of public worship at any time before or at the time of the presentation of the petition under sub- section  1  of section 7 of the act.
in short none of the ingredients mentioned in section 16 of the act applied to the said dera.
on the other hand, the institution in question is only a dera known as wada dera jalal.
it was founded and established by baba kharak singh, a nirmala sadhu long long ago.
baba kharak singh was a religious and pious person and was very much revered in the ilaqa.
he established the said dera to serve as a resting place for nirmala sadhus and to impart religious teachings to the disciples.
it was neither established for use by sikhs for the purpose of public worship nor was it used for such worship by the sikhs at any time.
the said dera is partly a religious and partly a charitable institution of a private nature.
guru granth sahib ji is held in great reverence by the nirmalas.
therefore, the same is opened in one room of the dera for recitation to the nirmala sadhus - the samadhies of the previous mahants also exist which are also the objects of worship by the disciples of the previous mahants.
the said dera is not a sikh gurdwara, but is only a nirmala institution.
nirmalas are not sikhs as defined in the said act.   5  that the signatures of the persons on the petition under section 7 1  of the act were obtained by the employees of the shiromani gurdwara parbandhak committee, amritsar fraudulently representing that the shiromani gurdwara parbandhak committee, amritsar was going to request the punjab state government to grant annual jagirs to all the religious institutions situate in erstwhile pepsu, hence they should subscribe their signatures on the paper.
most of the signatures are only bogus.
as a matter of fact, the said persons, never applied for declaring the said dera to be a sikh gurdwara.
3. of the remaining three petitions, two were filed by different sets of the worshippers of the institution.
the fourth petition was filed by some of the persons whose names appeared in notification dated 25.1.1963.
they claimed that their signatures were obtained by fraud and prayed that the dera in question may not be declared as sikh gurdwara.
4.
all the petitions were forwarded by the state government to the tribunal constituted under section 14 1  of the act.
the tribunal issued notices to all the persons who originally moved the state government under section 7 1  but none of them appeared to contest the petitions filed under section 8.
respondent - shiromani gurdwara prabandhak committee got itself impleaded as party to the proceedings pending before the tribunal and filed written statement questioning the very maintainability of the petition filed by the appellant on the ground that he was not a hereditary office-holder and the petition does not disclose the custom relating to devolution of mahantship in this gurdwara.
in paragraph 3 of the reply, the following averments were made para number3 is right, in this respect that baba kharak singh is a sikh saint and the gurdwara in dispute was established in his memory or in the alternative it was established by him for worship of sikhs and has been so used i.e. for worship by sikhs.
the case falls either u s. 16 2   3  or 16 2   4 .
this is a gurdwara which is a public religious and charitable institution.
existence of samadhi does not alter the nature of the institution.
5. on the pleadings of the parties, the tribunal framed the following preliminary issue whether the petitioner is a hereditary office-holder of the institution in dispute?
opp 6. on 2.3.1965, shri charan singh, advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent stated that he does not want to contest the status of the appellant to file petition under section 8 of the act as a hereditary office- holder because there are two other petitions to be decided on merits.
accordingly, the preliminary issue was decided in favour of the appellant.
7. on the same day i.e., 2.3.1965, an application was filed on behalf of the respondent for amendment of the written statement by substituting the original paragraph 3 with the following the institution in dispute is a sikh gurdwara built in memory of a visit of the 10th guru who came to this place from dina and lohgarh and stayed here for some time.
this gurdwara was built in memory of that visit and is being used as a place of worship by sikhs on account of the traditional visit of the 10th guru and is therefore, being worshipped by the sikhs or in the alternative under section 16 2   3 .
the amended written statement was also filed along with the application for amendment.
8. by an order dated 31.3.1965, the tribunal granted leave to the respondent to amend the written statement and framed the following issue whether the institution in dispute is a sikh gurdwara?
9. the appellant examined himself and seven other witnesses.
he also produced documentary evidence in the form of exhibits p-1 to p-31.
on behalf of the respondent, six witnesses were examined and eighteen documents marked exhibits r-1 to r-18 were produced.
10.
the tribunal first considered the question whether the institution could be declared as a sikh gurdwara because the same was established to commemorate the visit of 10th guru, shri guru gobind singh ji to village jalal and answered the same in negative by recording the following observations .
in this connection, he placed reliance on the statements of rw-1, mal singh, rw-2 santa singh, rw-3 gurnam singh, rw-4 balbinder singh, rw-5 jagir singh, rw-6 baga singh, who have all deposed that according to the tradition, the 10th guru visited village jalal on his way from village dina to village lambra of lamb-wali.
the ld. counsel also referred us the same books of history for substantiating his said contention.
but when confronted with narration to the contrary in quite a large number of historical works, relied upon and referred to us by the ld. counsel for the petitioner, s. charan singh did not press this plea any further.
there is evidently not enough evidence on the record either factual or historical from which it may be concluded that this institution has any connection with the visit of 10th guru to this place.
under the circumstances, we feel constrained to hold that the provisions of section 16 2   iv  are not attracted to the facts of the present case.
the plea taken by the respondent committee regarding the establishment of this institution in memory of the visit of tenth guru to this place is, therefore, rejected.
11.
the tribunal then considered the question whether the institution could be treated as a sikh gurdwara under section 16 2   iii  of the act, analysed the oral and documentary evidence produced by the parties and held that the institution is a sikh gurdwara.
for recording this conclusion, the tribunal mainly relied on the entries contained in the revenue records i.e. exhibit r-1  khatauni of village jalal , exhibit r-2  copy of jamabandi pertaining to years 1981-85 bk , exhibits r-3 and r-4  certified copies of jamabandies for the year 2000-2001 , exhibit r-5  certified copy of an extract from the register of muafi and pensions pertaining to village jalal , exhibit r-7  copy of the revised entries from the register of muafi of village jalal , exhibit r-6  certified copy of the pedigree table of village jalal , exhibits r-8 and r-9  certified copies of the statements of bhaktawar singh lambardar and mahant bishan singh recorded on 9.11.1985 bk in muafi file number9 , exhibit r-14  attested copy of an application made by dial singh lambardar and some other proprietors of village jalal dated 12, bhadon, sammat 1941 from file number192 decided on 11 asuj, 1941  1884 a.d. , exhibit r-18  copy of the jamabandi for the year 1969-70 a.d.  and observed thus from the documents placed and proved on the file on behalf of the respondent committee, it comes abundantly evidence that from its very inception, guru granth sahib has been ceremoniously opened and recited in the said institution which has throughout been described as a gurdwara in the oldest as well up to date revenue record pertaining to its lands and muafi  the presence and parkash of shri guru granth sahib in dera in question is clearly mentioned in this document which also incorporates the request and recommendation of the village proprietors to the effect that the land should be entered in the name of the dera granth sahib.
the counsel also argued that none of the documents marked exhibit p-1 to p-31 in any way supported the claim of the petitioner regarding nirmala character of the institution.
on the other hand most of the petitioners documents themselves show that the muafi of this institution was granted for the purposes of dharam arth and that the incumbents of this institution were all bhais and not nirmala sadhs as now alleged by the petitioner.
among sikhs the title bhai is generally meant and used for the most learned and venerable ones who are supposed to be well versed in sikh scriptures, literature and history.
it is also worth mentioning here that none of the documents exhibited on behalf of the petitioner suggest any other mode or object of worship in the said institution, at any stage of its existence.
the plea of samadh worship seems to be clearly an after thought and appears to have been introduced solely for the sake of casting doubt on the claim of the persons who have claims this institution to be sikh gurdwara.
12.
the tribunal noted the argument made by the counsel for the respondent that there is a statutory presumption regarding correctness of the entries in the record of rights and observed as the petitioner has not been able to rebute the presumption the entries in the jamabandi exhibits r-1, r-2, r-3, r-4 and r-18 showing guru granth sahib wakia deh hazah and gurdwara sahib wakia deh hazab as the executive owner of the landed property attached to the institution, must be presumed to be correct.
there seems to be much force in this argument of the counsel.
it is now for the petitioner to satisfy us how far he has succeeded in rebutting the said presumption.
13.
the tribunal also referred to the statements of the witnesses examined by the appellant and held that the same were not sufficient to discard the evidence produced by the respondent to show that the institution was in fact established as a sikh gurdwara for use by sikhs for the purpose of public worship.
the tribunal was also of the view that the affidavits  exhibits p7 to p10  of ginder singh, gurjant singh, nand singh, jiwan and harnam singh, who stated that their signatures on the petition filed under section 7 1  of the act were obtained by fraud cannot be relied upon because they were not examined as witnesses.
the tribunal then considered the argument that the dera was established by baba kharak singh, who was a nirmala saint and rejected the same by observing that no documentary evidence was produced to prove this fact.
the argument of the appellant that the use of the word dera in various documents is indicative of the fact that it was not a gurdwara was rejected by the tribunal by relying upon the judgments of this court in banta singh v. gurdwara sahib dasvi patshai and another  civil appeal number446 of 1962 decided on 9.11.1964  and three unreported judgments of the division bench of the high court wherein it was held that dera and gurdwara are interchangeable terms.
the tribunal distinguished the judgments of the lahore high court in ram parshad and others v. shiromani gurdwara parbandhak committee, amritsar and others air 1931 lahore 161 arjan singh and another v. inder dass and another air 1934 lahore 13 lachhman dass and others v. atma singh and others air 1935 lahore 666 maghar singh and others v. hardit dass air 1935 lahore 879 santa singh and others v. puran dass and others air 1936 lahore 216 hardit dass v. gurdit singh and another air 1936 lahore 819 dial singh v. bhagat ram and others air 1936 lahore 822 harnam dass v. kartar singh and another air 1936 lahore 825 ishar dass v. bhagwan singh and another air 1936 lahore 841 mukand singh v. puran dass air 1936 lahore 924 arjan singh and another v. harbhajan dass and another air 1937 lahore 280 and of the privy council in hem singh and others v. basant dass and others air 1936 pc 93 and distinguished the same by observing that the factual matrix of those cases was substantially different.
the tribunal rejected the plea of the appellant that the institution was established by nirmala sadh and distinguished the judgment of this court in mahant harnam singh v. gurdial singh and another air 1967 sc 1415 by making the following observations but we do not see what benefit can be derived therefrom by petitioners, in view of the overwhelming documentary evidence which repeatedly describe this institution to be a sikh gurdwara, where guru granth sahib has been the object of worship throughout its existence.
there is no an iota of evidence to show that the building mentioned as para 4 of the notification number385 g.p.
dated 25th january 1963 was ever established as a nirmala institution.
the gift of the land was never made to bhai bir singh individually or for his personal use.
it is also not mentioned in any of the documents that the institution was established for being used as nirmala monastery or college or for the purposes of smadh-worship or anything of that type.
if anything, the statement of the previous manager bhai bishan singh in the year 1928 a.d. copy marked exhibit r-9 closed the matter in regard to his religion as well as in regard to the nature of the institution.
he declared in unequivocal terms that he was a sikh jat and further that he was merely a manager or mahant of gurdwara sahib.
in our opinion, the petitioner has not been able to make out any case regarding the nirmala character of the institution.
on the other hand, on the basis of the documentary evidence discussed above, we feel inclined to hold that this institution was established by baba kharak singh.
a sikh gentleman of piety and prestige in the illaqa for use by sikhs for the purposes of public worship of sri guru granth sahib, the holy sikh scripture.
14.
in the end, the tribunal considered whether the requirement of user of the institution by sikhs for the purpose of public worship was satisfied and held next coming to the second requirement as to the user before and at the time of the presentation of the petition, we have mainly to draw material from the oral evidence adduced on behalf of the parties.
it is conceded by all the pws that the village is a sikh proprietory village and the major part of the population of the said village belongs to the sikh faith.
pw-7, sampuran singh and pw-8 jawala singh petitioner have further recorded that there is no other sikh gurdwara in the revenue estate of village jalal.
the consistent evidence of the respondents witnesses is, that the object of worship in the said gurdwara is shri guru granth sahib and nothing else.
rw-1 mal singh has deposed that guru granth sahib is the only object of worship in the institution and sikhs comes to pay reverence in this gurdwara on account of tradition associated with it.
in cross-examination he says that the chhota dera of isher singh has nothing to do with the institution in dispute.
rw- 2 , santa singh says that the sikhs of the village come to pay reverences to the gurdwara due to the tradition.
in cross- examination, he says that he has not noticed any smadhi in the gurdwara but on the back side in the cremation ground there are some samadhis.
rw-3 gurnam singh states that shri guru granth sahib is the object of worship in this institution and that the petitioner who is a follower of the sikh faith is a granthi and mahant of this gurudwara now.
he has further mentioned that the petitioner has started wearing saffron colour clothes for the last five or six months.
rw-4, balbinder singh says that the sikhs come to worship this institution where holy granths is the object of worship.
he also states that the birth day of 10th guru is celebrated as a gurpurab in the institution in dispute.
in cross- examination, he asserts that there are no smadhis on the premises of the institution, but there may be smadhis of some persons in the cremation ground of the village, which is at the back of the village institution.
towards the end of the cross-examination, he says that he visits the institution in dispute fortnightly or monthly and he last visited it about 15 days prior to his coming to the witness box.
rw-5 jagir sigh has stated that the institution in dispute is a sikh gurdwara where sikhs go to worship and pay reverence.
according to this rw, mahant bishan singh was a sikh and the mahants, who preceded him were also sikhs like him.
rw-6, baga singh has deposed that the sikhs who predominate the village go to the institution for worship where the object of worship is guru granth sahib.
according to rw baga singh, mahant bishan singh was a sikh.
in cross-examination, he was confronted with the writing marked exhibit rw-6/1 but he explained that the statement which he made in the court of subordinate judge, phool, related to another institution which was described as dera jawala singh.
in fairness to mr. sajjan singh, we must also notice his last submission regarding the nirmala nature of the institution in the light of certain passages occurring at pages 172 to 181 of the gurmukhi book nirmal panth darshan volume iii, written and published by mahant dial singh of mahabir nagar, new delhi.
on the basis of the version given therein the learned counsel for the petitioner strongly stressed that the institution be declared to be dera of the nirmala sadhus.
the learned counsel for the respondent committee took a strong objection a reference being made to this book on the ground that the same was purposely published by the nirmalas sometime in 1963 after the publication of the notification under section 7 3  in this case.
the date of the publication of the book is not mentioned anywhere on the title page or anywhere else in the book.
s. charan singh however, pointed out to us that the printed matter appearing to page 553 clearly indicated that this volume was published after july 1962.
the two dates 1st july 1962 and 10th july 1962 mentioned at the said page regarding the execution of some gift deed by the donor whose life is depicted thereafter, as well as the mention of some incidents of sammat 2018 both at page 553 and page 4 also afforded a clue that this book was published only recently.
another objection raised was that no attempt having been made by the petitioner to prove that the author had any special knowledge about the subject about which he had dealt with in the book or that he had done any research in the sikh history as a research scholar or as a historian, not much reliance can be placed on the narrations given in the said book.
it was further urged that the petitioner has neither shown that the book in question was based on the material obtained from old books on religion or history, nor has he brought its author in the witness box to depose about the source of correctness of the material collected in the said compilation.
taken together, the above factors do create an impression that the present volume of nirmala panth darshan may have been brought out with a purpose by and at the instance of the persons who were likely to be adversely affected by the various notifications issued by the state government under the relevant provisions of the sikh gurdwaras act as amended by act 1 of 1959.
in dealing with it, we have thus to exercise much caution, more so, when the learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to support the statements made in this volume by and from any other authoritative or standard work on the subject.
not only that, the disclosure made in the said book about the spiritual heritage of baba kharak singh, the founder of the institution in dispute, damages the case of the petitioner beyond repairs.
according to the pleadings and evidence of the petitioner, the said baba kharak singh was a nirmala sadh.
in the book under discussion baba kharak singh is shown as disciple of baba gurbux singh, the first mohatmim of historic sikh shrine known as gurdwara padshi naumi at dhamdhan, now a notified sikh gurdwara entered at serial number 314 of schedule i of the s.g. act.
it is next mentioned in it that the above said baba gurbax singh was administered amrit by bhai daya singh jee who had received nectar  amrit  directly from the 10th guru.
it may be noted here that the said baba daya singh was the first among the five pyaras or beloved ones who had offered their heads to shri guru gobind singh jee upon his command at keshgarh on the baisakhy festival of 1699 a.d.
nirmal panth darshan however reveals that the aforementioned baba kharak singh received amrit as well as his entire spiritual and religious training at the hands of said baba gurbax singh, who after bidding farewell to anandpur sahib, had taken his abode at gurdwara dhamdhan sahib.
there is no denying the fact that baba daya singh jee and baba gurbax singh jee above mentioned were both famous sikh heroes and historical persons, about whom references have been repeatedly made in all the important works of sikh history.
the fact that baba kharak singh was initiated into sikh-fold by administration of amrit that is sikh baptism by baba gurbux singh, in itself is enough to enable us to conclude that the former also came to be known as a sikh saint of great repute during his life time.
the institution established by such a devoted and dedicated sikh as baba kharak singh, for the purpose of public worship of shri guru granth sahib, cannot by any stretch of imagination or argument be held to a non-sikh or nirmala institution.
since, we find no substance whatsoever, even in the above submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner, which he urged as an argument of last resort, we accordingly repel the same.
15.
the appellant challenged the order of the tribunal by filing an appeal, which was dismissed by the impugned judgment.
the division bench of the high court discarded the documentary evidence produced by the appellant by making the following observations at the outset, we may point out that the documentary evidence led by the petitioner in the form of exhibits p-1 to p-31 is not of much use to him for proving his case to rebut the evidence led by the respondent-committee.
the tribunal in para 38 of its judgment observed- the learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to convince us as to how the documents exhibits p-1 to p-31 in any manner substantiate the allegations of the petitioners.
we also repeatedly asked the learned counsel for the appellant to explain how he derived any help from these documents to counter the case of the respondent.
he was unable to derive any support from these documents.
we, therefore, will not refer to those as they do not contain any substantial matter to dispute that the institution in dispute is not a sikh gurdwara.
16.
the division bench of the high court then referred to exhibits r1 and r7 in which guru granth sahib is shown as the owner of land in patti suleman and patti shamer and held that as per these entries, bhai bishan singh chela of bhai gulab singh, nirmala sadh, resident of village jalal was only a non-occupancy tenant.
the bench did take note of the appellants plea that baba kharak singh had founded the institution but did not accept the same and observed in the case of the appellant that baba kharak singh had founded the institution, but there is no direct evidence of any type, oral or documentary of the time of the establishment of the institution pointing to the purpose of its establishment.
we have to fall back upon the available records of the earliest times.
the revenue records referred to above are the only authentic and reliable evidence available to assess the situation.
these documents show that the land of both the pattis suleman and shamir in village jalal stood in the name of gurdwara sahib or guru granth sahib right from the earlier times, the records came into existence.
in exhibits r- 2 and r-7, the entries in red ink show that the muafi was granted for dhoop deep of guru granth sahib, serving the sadhus and also serving feed to the wayfarers till the continuance of the dera.
these records, which are unimpeachable and no effect was made to doubt their veracity on behalf of the appellant, go to establish the presence of guru granth sahib in the institution since the earliest times.
muafi for dhoop deep of guru granth sahib also indicates that it was being worshipped there and such worship was done publicly.
unless it was worshipped openly, the rulers could not have sanctioned the muafi and continued it in the terms which are recorded in red ink in the revenue documents.   emphasis supplied  the division bench then referred to the statement of dogar singh lamberdar of patti suleman, which was recorded on 23rd asuj samvat 1956, statement of another lamberdar of village jalal, namely, bakhtawar singh, which was recorded on 8th november, 1985 bk.
and statement of bishan singh, an office-holder of the institution recorded on 8th november, 1985 bk.
and proceeded to observe in this statement, he made an unequivocal declaration that it is a gurdwara and that the income is being spent on dhoop deep and also for serving travellers.
he wanted the muafi to be continued as before, that is, in the name of the gurdwara or guru granth sahib, as is indicated from the entries in red ink incorporated in the revenue record referred to above.
serving the travellers or running a langer etc. is a charitable purpose of a sikh gurdwara.
when the other places of evidence referred to above are considered with the admission of bishan singh, in exhibit r-9, then it makes the matter very clear that the institution was established as a sikh gurdwara for the use of sikh for public worship.
it has to be held so especially when no direct evidence has been led that baba kharak singh had founded it or that he was a nirmala.
it becomes clear from the above discussed evidence that it was a gurdwara and not a dera of the nirmalas.
all the documents leave no room for doubt that guru granth sahib was the only object of worship in this institution.
in the petition itself, the presence of guru granth sahib is mentioned though the purpose was sought to be restricted only for the benefit of the nirmalas.
in the light of the discussion in the previous paragraphs, we are inclined to accept this assertion about the restricted use only by the nirmalas.
if it was for a limited purpose, then the lamberdars and biswadars, who made statements during the enquiries about the muafi could not make those statements, which have been referred to in the previous paragraphs in the revenue records, it could not be referred to as a gurdwara.
even bhai bishan singh admitted it to be a gurdwara in his statement exhibit r-9.
the muafi could not be granted and continued in the terms given.
the bws were emphatical in their assertion that guru granth sahib was the only object of worship.
they get very strong support from the circumstances discussed above.
17.
in support of its conclusion that the institution in question is a sikh gurdwara, the division bench of the high court, in addition to the documentary evidence produced by the respondent, strongly relied upon the following factors 1.
the majority of the population of village jalal was sikh 2.
there is no other gurdwara in the village where the sikhs could go for worship and 3. maharaja of nabha who gave muafi and other grants was himself a sikh ruler.
18.
shri sarvesh bisaria, learned counsel for the appellant referred to section 16 2  iii  of the act to show that an institution can be declared to be a sikh gurdwara only if it is proved that the same was established for use by sikhs for the purpose of public worship and was so used before and at the time of presentation of petition under section 7 1 .
learned counsel emphasized that the burden to prove both the ingredients of section 16 2  iii  was on the respondent, which it miserably failed to discharge and argued that the tribunal committed a jurisdictional error by declaring the institution in question to be a sikh gurdwara only on the ground that in the revenue records produced by the respondent, guru granth sahib was shown as the owner of various parcels of land and baba bishan singh chela of baba gulab singh was shown as a non- occupancy tenant.
learned counsel pointed out that in the amended written statement, the respondent had specifically pleaded that the gurdwara in question was established to commemorate the visit of 10th guru and is being used as a place of worship on account of the said visit, but failed to substantiate the same.
learned counsel then submitted that even though in paragraph 3 of the amended written statement a reference was also made to section 16 2  iii , there was not a whisper that the institution was established for use by sikhs for the purpose of public worship and was used as such before and at the time of presentation of the petition under section 7 1  and argued that in the absence of a foundation having been laid, the tribunal was not justified in granting a declaration that the institution is a sikh gurdwara.
shri bisaria criticized the impugned judgment and argued that the high court committed serious error by deciding the appeal without even adverting to the documentary evidence produced by the appellant on the specious ground that the counsel appearing on his behalf could not explain as to how the same were helpful to the cause of his client.
shri bisaria extensively referred to documents produced before this court which, according to the learned counsel formed part of the record of the tribunal and the high court to show that maharaja bharpur singh of nabha state  village jalal was part of the princely state of nabha  had granted land measuring 50 ghumaon  approximately 200 bighas  to bhai bir singh as early as in samvat 1908 and that in samvat 1914 the land was given to bhai bir singh on periodical lease when maharaja bharpur singh visited phul and argued that the documentary evidence showing grant of muafi in respect of a portion of the land granted to bhai bir singh and recording of the name of dera granth sahib as per the desire of the owners was clearly indicative of the fact that the institution in question was a dera and not a gurdwara much less a sikh gurdwara established for use by sikhs for the purpose of public worship.
in the end, shri bisaria relied upon section 4 of the places of worship  special provisions  act, 1991  for short, the 1991 act  and argued that religious character of the dera cannot be changed on the